
=== 第 1 页 ===
Microsoft New 
Future of Work 
Report 2025
A summary of recent research from 
Microsoft and around the world that 
can help us create a new and better 
future of work with AI.

=== 第 2 页 ===
Microsoft New Future of Work Report
aka.ms/nfw
Editors and Authors
Editors: Jenna Butler (Principal Applied Research Scientist), Sonia Jaffe (Principal Researcher), Rebecca Janßen (Senior Applied 
Scientist), Nancy Baym (Partner Research Manager), Brent Hecht (Partner Director of Applied Research), Jake Hofman (Senior 
Principal Researcher), Sean Rintel (Principal Research Sciences Manager), Bahar Sarrafzadeh (Principal Applied Research Scientist), 
Abigail Sellen (Distinguished Scientist), Mihaela Vorvoreanu (Principal Applied Scientist), Jaime Teevan (Chief Scientist and 
Technical Fellow).
Authors: Mohammed Alsobay, Liz Ankrah, Nancy Baym, Stephanie Beers, Megan Benzing, Mia Bruch, Zana Buçinca, Jenna Butler, 
Mar Carpanelli, Amelia Cole, Scott Counts, Madeleine Daepp, Justin Edwards, Alex Farach, Dan Goldstein, Mary L. Gray, Brent 
Hecht, Javier Hernandez, Jake Hofman, Eric Horvitz, Nicole Immorlica, Kori Inkpen, Shamsi Iqbal, Sonia Jaffe, Manasa Jagadeesh, 
Rebecca Janßen, Siân Lindley, Brendan Lucier, Nic Marquardt, Mercy Muchai, Ambrita Nand, Alexandra Olteanu, Jacki O'Neill, Max 
Peterschmidt, Christian Poelitz, Rabeeza, Nathalie Riche, Sean Rintel, Advait Sarkar, Bahar Sarrafzadeh, Sunayana Sitaram, Amanda 
Snellinger, Jina Suh, John Tang, Lev Tankelevitch, Jaime Teevan, Kiran Tomlinson, Anne Trapasso, Adam Troy, Gaurav Verma, Mihaela 
Vorvoreanu, Jack Williams, Jordana Young, Ben Zorn.
Referencing this report:
• On social media, please include the report URL (https://aka.ms/nfw2025). 
• In academic publications, please cite as: Butler, J., Jaffe, S., Janßen, R., Baym, N., Hecht, B., Hofman, J., Rintel, S., Sarrafzadeh, B., 
Sellen, A., M., Vorvoreanu, Teevan., J. (Eds.). Microsoft New Future of Work Report 2025. Microsoft Research Tech Report MSR-
TR-2025-58 (https://aka.ms/nfw2025), 2025.
Some of the information in this document relates to pre-released content which may be subsequently modified. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information 
provided here. This document is provided “as-is”. Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. Some 
examples depicted herein are provided for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association or connection is intended or should be inferred. This document does not provide you with any legal 
rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product.
© 2025 Microsoft. All rights reserved.
2

=== 第 3 页 ===
Microsoft New Future of Work Report
aka.ms/nfw
Welcome to the 2025 Microsoft New Future of Work Report!
As you sit down to read the 2025 New Future of Work report, it’s worth pausing to consider the thread that ties the 
past five years of reports together. The inaugural New Future of Work report, published in 2021, focused on new 
ways people could work without relying on colocation as a key productivity tool. The second, in 2022, centered on 
the reintroduction of physical offices and the emergence of hybrid work. In 2023, we explored how large language 
models could reshape everyday work, and, in 2024, how those advances moved from promise to real-world impact.
Each year, as I’ve written this introduction, I’ve found myself saying that the previous year marked a once-in-a-
lifetime generational shift. But after five years, it’s clear that the reports aren’t capturing a series of separate 
revolutions. Rather, they are chapters in a single story of the digital evolution of collaboration, each representing a 
phase that builds on, and is enabled by, what came before.
Last year’s report highlighted research showing that AI delivers substantial gains in individual productivity. The next 
frontier, covered in this year’s report, is collective productivity: how teams, organizations, and communities can get 
better together. AI can bridge gaps of time, distance, and scale, but only if built correctly. We must design AI to 
support shared goals, group context, and the norms of collaboration, and this requires not just new tools but new 
ways of working.
Microsoft’s mission to empower every person and every organization on the planet to achieve more remains a 
stable north star as the terrain shifts. If the past five years taught us anything, it’s that the future of work is not 
something that happens to us, it’s something we create together, as a research community, as an industry, and as a 
public. As always, we invite you to join that effort, approaching it with curiosity, intentionality, and guided by 
evidence, so the next chapter of work is better for everyone.
– Jaime Teevan, Chief Scientist and Technical Fellow

=== 第 4 页 ===
Microsoft New Future of Work Report
aka.ms/nfw
This report is a product of Microsoft’s New Future of Work Initiative
Microsoft has shaped information work for over 50 years and 
the New Future of Work (NFW) initiative has helped it 
navigate the past five years of profound transformation. 
While the initiative was born out of the COVID-19 pandemic 
and subsequent shifts to remote and hybrid work, since 2023 
it has focused on the incorporation and growing role of tools 
powered by large AI models. 
Throughout this transformative period, the NFW initiative has 
brought together researchers from across Microsoft to 
conduct primary research and synthesize existing findings 
from the literature. The goal is not merely to predict what 
changes are coming, but to actively create a new future of 
work that is equitable, inclusive, meaningful, and productive.
The fifth edition of the annual NFW report represents 
another year of research and analysis, adding to the growing 
body of knowledge on AI and work. The evidence and 
insights presented here are not monolithic and represent 
contributing researchers’ perspectives rather than Microsoft’s 
corporate views. Additional research papers, practical guides, 
and white papers are available at: aka.ms/nfw.
4
A screenshot of aka.ms/nfw
aka.ms/nfw

=== 第 5 页 ===
Microsoft New Future of Work Report
aka.ms/nfw
Report overview
This report provides research-backed insights into how AI is (or sometimes, should be) shaping 
work. Some of the questions it addresses include:
•
Adoption and Usage: What changes are occurring in adoption and usage? What are the drivers and challenges? 
What are the gaps?
•
Impact on Work and Labor Markets: How is AI impacting work and productivity? How are jobs evolving? Is 
generative AI affecting employment and wages? Where might agents reshape markets? What roles do automation 
and augmentation play?
•
Human-AI Collaboration: How are the ways people interact with AI changing? How can human-AI collaboration 
be improved? How does AI use differ across modalities and time frames?
•
AI for Teamwork: How can AI support teams as well as individuals? What role can AI play in team settings? What 
is needed to effectively integrate AI into group workflows?
•
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences: What are the effects of AI on cognition and thinking? Can AI 
be designed not just to create useful output, but to make the people who work with it smarter? How can AI serve 
as an effective classroom tool? Is it possible to measure psychological or well-being impacts from AI?
•
Specific Roles and Industries: How is AI changing work for software engineers, program managers, researchers, 
and other professions? 
•
External Voices: What do leading scholars outside of Microsoft think are the most critical topics in this space?
5

=== 第 6 页 ===
Introduction
aka.ms/nfw
Key context: AI capabilities continue to advance, especially due to 
reinforcement learning
•
Long-horizon task completion capability is measurably accelerating. METR’s 
50% task-completion time horizon shows frontier agents’ reliable task 
length has been rising exponentially with an ~7-month doubling time, 
turning “agent progress” into a concrete capability trend (Kwa et al., 2025).
•
Verifiable reinforcement learning (RL) post-training (rewarding correct, 
checkable outcomes) enabled strong gains on hard math/coding style tasks 
even when starting from a base model with no labeled reasoning traces.​ 
(DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025).
•
Scalable test-time compute frameworks gained traction, with open-weight 
models achieving IOI 2025 gold-level performance, showing repeatable 
“more compute → higher score” curves in competitive programming. 
(Samadi et al., 2025).
•
Multi-turn RL for tool-using/search agents is now beating prompt-only baselines by learning from experience over 
longer action horizons; on a legal document search benchmark, an RL-trained 14B agent reports 85% vs 78% against 
frontier-class models, with additional gains when allowed more turns. (Kalyan & Andrews, 2025).
•
Multi-model routing + aggregation is shifting from one-shot “pick a model” to an RL-trained sequential policy that can 
think, call multiple models, and integrate responses while explicitly optimizing performance–cost tradeoffs—improving 
results across multi-hop QA style evaluations. (Zhang et al., 2025).
Task Completion Horizon from Kwa et al. (2025). 
Kwa, T. et al. (2025). Measuring AI Ability to Complete Long Tasks. METR.
DeepSeek-AI et al. (2025). DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning. arXiv Working Paper.
Samadi, M. et al. (2025). Scaling Test-Time Compute to Achieve IOI Gold Medal with Open-Weight Models. arXiv Working Paper.
Kalyan, V. and Andrews, M. (2025). Reinforcement Learning for Long-Horizon Multi-Turn Search Agents. arXiv Working Paper.
Zhang, H. et al. (2025). Router-R1: Teaching LLMs Multi-Round Routing and Aggregation via Reinforcement Learning. arXiv Working Paper.
6

=== 第 7 页 ===
Adoption and Usage
aka.ms/nfw
Investment in and adoption of generative AI continues to grow
•
Effects of and gains from generative AI will be mediated by adoption (Jaffe et al., 
2024).
•
In 2024, Generative AI had $33.9 billion in global private investment—an 18.7% 
increase from 2023. Public investment has also grown (Maslej et al., 2025).
•
AI use at work has been increasing, but heterogeneous:
•
Enterprise ChatGPT messages increased 8x in the past year (Chatterji et al., 
2025).
•
A German survey found 38% of employed respondents used AI for work (Giering 
& Kirchner, 2025).
•
A survey of enterprise leaders found that usage and confidence were highest in 
IT & Procurement and lowest in Marketing/Sales and Operations; the 
Tech/Telecom, Professional Services, and Finance industries are leading (Korst et 
al., 2025).
•
A large 2024 survey of Americans found men were more likely than women (29.1% vs 23.5%) to use generative AI for work 
(Bick et al., 2024).
•
On the consumer side, in June 2025, ChatGPT had over 700 million weekly active users globally (Chatterji et al., 2025).
•
The gender gap (based on first names) of consumer ChatGPT users is gone, a dramatic change since early 2023 when >80% 
were male (Chatterji et al., 2025).
Use of AI-based systems at work to recognize and process (weighted 
percentages) from Giering & Kirchner (2025).
Microsoft Study: Jaffe et al. (2024). Generative AI in Real-World Workplaces.
Maslej, N. et al. (2025). The AI Index 2025 Annual Report. AI Index Steering Committee, Institute for Human-Centered AI, Stanford University.
Chatterji, R. et al. (2025). The state of enterprise AI. OpenAI
Giering, O. and Kirchner, S. (2025). Artificial intelligence and autonomy at work: empirical insights from Germany. Journal for Labour Market Research.
Korst, J. et al. (2025). Accountable Acceleration: Gen AI Fast-Tracks Into the Enterprise. Wharton Human-AI Research and GBK Collective.
Bick, A. et al. (2024). The Rapid Adoption of Generative AI. NBER Working Paper.
7

=== 第 8 页 ===
Adoption and Usage
aka.ms/nfw
Organizational AI adoption depends on employees as much as leaders 
•
Across industries, the intention to use AI is influenced by social norms learned from leaders and peers (Kelly et al., 2023). 
•
Workers can be reluctant to adopt top-down mandated AI products that prioritize efficiency above quality and 
creativity, undermining the traditional view of humans as the core value driver of businesses. This reluctance limits the success 
of AI pilot programs (Young et al., 2025; Sharma, 2025; Murire, 2024). 
•
Leaders can facilitate AI adoption through clear communication supporting AI use, demonstrating their own learning, and 
setting realistic expectations about what AI can accomplish (Carter et al., 2024; Tursunbayeva & Chalutz-Ben Gal, 2024).
•
AI products that integrate human thinking, creativity, and expertise while amplifying their value can promote adoption without 
raising concerns about replacement (Ali et al., 2025; Young et al., 2025; Sharma, 2025). For example, an AI assistant can act as a 
thought partner, helping users explore ideas and connect concepts across their knowledge base.
•
Some of the best ways an organization might find to use AI “come from the edge, not the center” (Winsor, 2024). 
Organizations can facilitate AI adoption by creating systems and incentives for employees to share how they use AI with one 
another (Tursunbayeva & Chalutz-Ben Gal, 2024; Winsor, 2024). 
•
Employees are more likely to experiment with using AI and to share those insights with others when they feel safe and trust 
their organizations (Tursunbayeva & Chalutz-Ben Gal, 2024; Bankins et al., 2021).
•
Many employees, particularly Gen X, will not adopt tools that make them conform to a way of working - they want products 
that are flexible enough to fit personal ways of working (Rozsa et al., 2023; Doblinger, 2023).
Kelly, S. et al. (2023). What factors contribute to the acceptance of artificial intelligence?  A systematic review. Telematics and Informatics.
Microsoft Study: Young, J. et al. (2025). The Future of Enterprise. Internal.
Sharma, R. (2025). The Impact of AI-Generated Content on Human Creativity and Original Thought: A Psychological Study. APA.
Murire, O. T. (2024). Artificial Intelligence and Its Role in Shaping Organizational Work Practices and Culture. MDPI.
Carter, J. et al. (2024) To Succeed with AI, Adopt a Beginner’s Mindset. Harvard Business Review.
Tursunbayeva, A. and Chalutz-Ben Gal, H. (2024). Adoption of artificial intelligence: A TOP framework-based checklist for digital leaders. Business Horizons. 
Ali, D. et al. (2025). AI Adoption Across Mission-Driven Organizations. arXiv Working Paper.
Winsor, J. (2024). How to Be Systematic About Adopting AI at Your Company. Harvard Business Review. 
Bankins, S. et al. (2021). A multilevel review of artificial intelligence in organizations. Journal of Organizational Behavior.
Rozsa, Z. et al. (2023). Job Crafting and Sustainable Work Performance: A Systematic Literature Review. Equilibrium. Quarterly Journal of Economics and Economic Policy.
Doblinger, M. (2023). Autonomy and Engagement in Self-Managing Organizations: Exploring the Relations with Job Crafting, Error Orientation and Person–Environment Fit. Front. Psychol.
8

=== 第 9 页 ===
Adoption and Usage
aka.ms/nfw
Centering worker voice in AI design boosts productivity, satisfaction, and skill 
growth—driving both business success and worker flourishing
•
Worker involvement in technology design promotes sustainable productivity and job satisfaction. Historical and contemporary 
research consistently shows that when workers’ expertise and perspectives inform the design and deployment of workplace 
technologies, organizations achieve more sustainable improvements in productivity and well-being (Trist & Bamforth, 1951; 
Roethlisberger & Dickson, 1939; Hackman & Oldham, 1976).
•
Ethnographic and HCI research demonstrates that workers adapt technology in creative ways, and that participatory design—
where workers are co-designers—results in tools that better fit real workflows and foster higher adoption (Suchman, 1987; Orr, 
1996; Awumey et al., 2024; Ehn, 1993; Doellgast et al., 2025).
•
Combining technical and social science research methods can create AI systems that improve worker skills and satisfaction—
not just accuracy—by embedding human-centric metrics, workers’ values, and skill-building into their design (Bucinca, 2025).
•
Data-driven workplace monitoring (telemetry) has mixed effects and should be governed with worker input for best outcomes. 
While monitoring and algorithmic management can boost short-term output, they often increase stress and erode trust unless 
workers help define what is measured and how data is used (Pentland, 2012; Wells et al., 2007; Ajunwa, 2023). 
Trist, E. and Bamforth, K. (1951). Some Social and Psychological Consequences of the Longwall Method of Coal-Getting. Human Relations.
Roethlisberger, F. and Dickson, W. (1939). Management and the worker. Harvard University Press.
Hackman, J. and Oldham, G. (1976). Motivation through the design of work: Test of a theory. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human-Machine Communication. Cambridge University Press.
Orr, J. (1996). Talking About Machines: An Ethnography of a Modern Job. Cornell University Press.
Awumey, E. et al. (2024). A Systematic Review of Biometric Monitoring in the Workplace: Analyzing Sociotechnical Harms in Development, Deployment and Use. FAccT.
Ehn, P. (1993). Scandinavian Design: On Participation and Skill.
Doellgast, V. et al. (2025). Global Case Studies of Social Dialogue on AI and algorithmic management. International Labour Organization.
Bucinca, Z. (2025). Worker-Centric AI for Decision-Support. Harvard University.
Pentland, A. (2012). The New Science of Building Great Teams. Harvard Business Review.
Wells, J. et al. (2007). The impact of the perceived purpose of electronic performance monitoring on an array of attitudinal variables. Human Resource Development Quarterly.
Ajunwa, I. (2023). The Quantified Worker. Cambridge University Press.
9

=== 第 10 页 ===
Adoption and Usage
aka.ms/nfw
CEOs expect AI to transform their businesses, but leading organizational AI 
adoption can be challenging
•
A 2025 IBM survey of 2000 CEOs in 33 countries and 24 industries found that most CEOs expect AI to transform their 
businesses. Other industry research shows leaders believe having the most advanced generative AI is crucial to remaining 
competitive (de Bellefonds et al., 2024; IBM Institute for Business Value, 2025).
•
However, organizational leaders have difficulties developing top-down AI strategies for many reasons, including the rapid 
diffusion of AI technologies, the speed with which they change, the need to communicate and reach alignment about AI, the 
need to prioritize AI against other concerns, and the challenge of reimagining workflows and processes (de Bellefonds et al., 
2024; Leonardi, 2023).
•
A comparative case study of AI adoption in the Dutch public sector found adoption barriers included organizational inflexibility 
and risk intolerance, as well as structural separation between exploration and exploitation. For example, a data science team 
might be put in charge of exploring AI without operational alignment or frontline and leadership support to exploit and scale 
their ideas (Selten & Klievink, 2024).
•
Chen & Tajdini (2024) surveyed managers involved in Marketing and AI at US-based firms involved in high-tech consumer 
goods, industrial equipment, and financial services. They found that organizational intensity of AI adoption was driven by top 
management support, customer orientation, and emerging industry social norms toward adopting AI (Chen & Tajdini, 2024).
•
Additionally, organizations are best able to adopt AI when they are innovative, experimental and learning-oriented, supportive, 
and collaborative (de Bellefonds et al., 2024; Tursunbayeva & Chalutz-Ben Gal, 2024, Sternfels & Atsmon, 2025).
de Bellefonds, N. et al. (2024). Where’s the Value in AI? Boston Consulting Group. 
IBM Institute for Business Value (2025). 5 mindshifts to supercharge business growth. IBM.
Leonardi, P. (2023). Helping Employees Succeed with Generative AI. Harvard Business Review. 
Selten, F. and Klievink, B. (2024). Organizing public sector AI adoption: Navigating between separation and integration. Government Information Quarterly.
Chen, J. and Tajdini, S. (2024). A moderated model of artificial intelligence adoption in firms and its effects on their performance. Information Technology Management.
Tursunbayeva, A. and Chalutz-Ben Gal, H. (2024). Adoption of artificial intelligence: A TOP framework-based checklist for digital leaders. Business Horizons.
Sternfels, B. and Atsmon, Y. (2025). The learning organization: How to accelerate AI adoption. McKinsey.
10

=== 第 11 页 ===
Adoption and Usage
aka.ms/nfw
Social norms shape how people interpret others’ (possible) AI use, often with 
negative consequences 
•
Research has shown that suspected use of AI can result in moral evaluations. People who 
use AI assistance expect to be, and often are, evaluated as “lazier”, less competent, less 
diligent, less trustworthy, and less moral (Reif et al., 2025; Schilke & Reimann, 2025; Zhou et 
al., 2025). These effects are lessened when evaluators, including managers, have experience 
with and positive attitudes towards AI (Reif et al., 2025; Schilke & Reimann, 2025).
•
Being seen as using AI can harm relationships with colleagues, perhaps because AI-using 
employees may be seen as “slacking” rather than putting in personal effort (Zhou et al., 
2025). Paradoxically, the act of disclosing the use of AI can erode trust (Schilke & Reimann, 
2025).
•
The extent to which these “perceptual harms” (Kadoma et al., 2025) vary across social 
identities is unclear: 
•
Reif et al. (2025) found no gender differences in experiments across occupational categories.
•
Kadoma et al. (2025) found that male (and East Asian) freelancers were more likely to be suspected of using AI and hence 
evaluated negatively.
•
Software engineers who used AI received lower competency ratings on identical work, and this effect was doubled for 
females, with women receiving a competency score 13% less for identical code (vs 6% for men) (Gai et al., 2025).
Differences in evaluations for AI help vs. Non-AI help and 
AI help vs. Control. Positive d values indicate higher 
values in the AI Help condition while negative d values 
indicate lower values in the AI Help condition. Error bars 
represent 95% CI. From Reif et al. (2025)
Reif, J. et al. (2025). Evidence of a social evaluation penalty for using AI. PNAS.
Schilke, O. and Reimann, M. (2025). The transparency dilemma: How AI disclosure erodes trust. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes.
Zhou, X. et al. (2024). How Do Coworkers Interpret Employee AI Usage: Coworkers' Perceived Morality and Helping as Responses to Employee AI Usage. Human Resource Management.
Kadoma, K. et al. (2025). Generative AI and Perceptual Harms: Who’s Suspected of using LLMs? CHI.
Gai, P. et al. (2025). Competence Penalty Is a Barrier to the Adoption of New Technology. SSRN Working Paper. 
11

=== 第 12 页 ===
Adoption and Usage
aka.ms/nfw
The Responsible AI Organizational Maturity Model provides a map for 
organizational change
•
AI adoption and capability building require organizational transformation (Kemp, 2024). 
Maturity models are useful tools for guiding organizational transformation. Existing maturity 
models focus on building AI capability (Alsheiabni et al., 2019; Vaish et al., 2021) and AI 
adoption (Hansen et al., 2024). 
•
The Responsible AI Organizational Maturity Model (RAI-OMM) provides a map for 
organizations to advance their responsible AI strategy and practice (Heger et al., 2025). The 
RAI-OMM is forward-looking and best used for planning, not evaluation.
•
Based on interviews and co-design sessions with 90 RAI experts and practitioners, the RAI-
OMM identifies 24 aspects (dimensions) that need to be considered for mature RAI practice 
and describes, for each dimension, five distinct maturity levels.
•
RAI maturity requires leadership investment, aligned organizational practices, and holistic change management strategies 
that address both technological and human dimensions (Duran, 2025; Shekshnia, 2025; Wang et al., 2025; Herrmann & 
Pfeiffer, 2023; Yunusa, 2025).
•
RAI maturity dimensions are interdependent and fall into three categories: Organizational Foundations require leadership 
commitment and investment in organization-wide infrastructure; Team Approach dimensions highlight the necessity of 
cross-discipline collaboration; finally, these make possible mature RAI Practice, which is characterized by deep integration 
into AI development & deployment processes.
The 24 dimensions in the RAI-OMM fall into three 
main categories (Heger et al., 2025).
Kemp, A. (2024). Competitive advantage through artificial intelligence: Toward a theory of situated AI. Academy of Management Review.
Alsheiabni, S. et al. (2019). Towards an Artificial Intelligence maturity model: From science fiction to business facts. PACIS. 
Vaish, R. et al. (2021). AI maturity framework for enterprise applications. IBM Technical Report. 
Hansen, H. et al. (2024). Understanding Artificial Intelligence Diffusion through an AI capability maturity model. Information System Frontiers. 
Microsoft Study: Heger, A. et al. (2025). Towards a Responsible AI Organizational Maturity Model. CSCW. 
Microsoft Study: Duran, J. et al. (2025). RAI advocacy: Communicative strategies for advancing responsible AI in large technology companies. AIES. 
Shekshnia, S. (2025). AI strategy, leadership, talent and workforce, and transformation. In: AI Leadership for Corporate Boards. Springer.
Wang, A. et al. (2024). Strategies for increasing corporate responsible AI prioritization. AIES. 
Herrmann, T. and Pfeiffer, S. (2023). Keeping the organization in the loop: a socio-technical extension of human-centered artificial intelligence. AI & Society.
Yunusa, E. (2025). Creating an artificial intelligence-ready organizational culture: harmonizing human existence with AI strategic decision-making. International  Journal of Business  Sustainability. 
12

=== 第 13 页 ===
Adoption and Usage
aka.ms/nfw
Analyses of LLM logs are showing for which activities the tools are used, and 
which occupations do those activities
•
Analysis of ChatGPT found growth in work-related messages but 
even faster growth in non-work-related messages.
•
 “Practical Guidance,” “Seeking Information,” and “Writing” are 
the three most common topics, accounting for ~80% of all use 
messages (Chatterji et al., 2025).
•
Researchers at Anthropic found that 37% of Claude usage was 
for tasks associated with Computer and Mathematical 
occupations (Handa et al., 2025).
•
An analysis of Microsoft Bing Copilot logs looked separately, for 
each conversation, at the work activities associated with users' 
goals and the AI actions (Tomlinson et al., 2025).
•
The most common user goals involved learning and 
communicating; AI actions were largely communicating and 
explaining; both sides had lots of writing activities. 
•
Aggregating activities to occupations, most occupations have 
some AI-applicable tasks, with information workers including 
sales, computer occupations, media, and administrative 
occupations at the top.
Graph shows average AI applicability for the user goal (x-axis) and the AI action (y-axis) 
(Tomlinson et al., 2025).
Chatterji, A. et al. (2025). How People Use ChatGPT. NBER Working Paper.
Handa K. et al. (2025). Which economic tasks are performed with AI? evidence from millions of Claude conversations. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Tomlinson, K. et al (2025). Working with AI: Measuring the Applicability of Generative AI to Occupations. arXiv Working Paper.
13

=== 第 14 页 ===
Adoption and Usage
aka.ms/nfw
AI could broaden access to high-value knowledge work outputs and 
opportunities, if societal and technical barriers can be overcome
•
AI can increase people's efficiency in multiple domains of 
knowledge work (Dillon et al., 2025; Brynjolfsson et al., 2025; Cui  et 
al., 2024).
•
These capabilities could broaden the set of people who have access 
to knowledge work skills and outputs (Autor, 2024); this is 
bolstered by evidence that AI can shrink skill gaps in knowledge 
work (Brynjolfsson et al., 2025; Cui et al., 2024). Autor argues this 
could allow more people to engage in high-barrier-to-entry work, 
like medical or legal decision-making.
•
For AI to be democratizing in this way, technical improvements are 
needed to address the "rich-get-richer" effect in open-ended, 
creative tasks and policy innovation will be needed to mitigate 
emerging divides in AI investment, access, and benefits (Daepp et 
al., 2025; Microsoft AI Economy Institute, 2025).
Estimates of how applicable AI is to different occupational categories, from 
Eloundou et al. (2024) and Tomlinson et al. (2025). Knowledge work occupations are 
highlighted. Boxplots are employment-weighted and diamonds show means. Both 
studies show AI to be most useful for knowledge work occupational tasks (Daepp et 
al., 2025).
Microsoft Study: Dillon, E. et al. (2025). Early impact of M365 Copilot. arXiv Working Paper.
Brynjolfsson, E. et al. (2025). Generative AI at work. The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Microsoft Study: Cui, Y. et al. (2024). The effects of generative Ai on high-skilled work: Evidence from three field experiments with software developers. SSRN Working Paper.
Autor, D. (2024). AI could actually help rebuild the middle class. Noema.
Microsoft Study: Daepp, M. et al. (2025). AI and the democratization of knowledge work. Under review.
Microsoft Study: Microsoft AI Economy Institute (2025). AI Diffusion Report: Where AI is most used, developed, and built. Microsoft.
Eloundou, T. et al. (2024). GPTs are GPTs: Labor market impact potential of LLMs. Science.
Microsoft Study: Tomlinson, K. et al (2025). Working with AI: Measuring the Applicability of Generative AI to Occupations. arXiv Working Paper.
14

=== 第 15 页 ===
Adoption and Usage
aka.ms/nfw
AI use in low-income countries is growing, particularly for schooling
•
Though AI usage remains highest in high-income and technologically advanced countries 
(Microsoft AI Economy Institute, 2025; Appel et al., 2025), the last year has seen dramatic 
usage growth in low- to middle-income countries, narrowing the gap (Chatterji et al., 
2025).
•
In one survey, people in Asia and Latin America were more likely to agree that “products 
and services using AI have more benefits than drawbacks” (e.g., China: 83%, Mexico: 70%) 
while agreement is lower in Europe and the Anglosphere (e.g., US: 39%, Netherlands: 36%) 
(Maslej et al., 2025).
•
Adoption is highest in countries that have invested in digital infrastructure and education, 
and where the predominant language is one well-served by existing models (Microsoft AI 
Economy Institute, 2025).
•
When local languages are not well-served by AI, people sometimes use English 
instead: chats are conducted in English at disproportionate rates relative to the 
fraction of the population that speaks English in African and Asian countries, but not 
in Europe or the Americas (Slaughter & Daepp, in prep.).
•
How AI is used also differs across place. In a study of early chatbot adopters, LLM usage 
for school increases with GDP per capita, while use for leisure decreases (see chart; 
Slaughter & Daepp, in prep.). This may be partially due to differences in the share of 
school-age population or in the amount of leisure time. 
Patterns in Usage Domain among Early Adopters of 
Bing Copilot, the percentage of users in a country 
who predominantly had conversations in the 
specified domain (schooling, market work, or 
leisure) by GDP per capita (Slaughter & Daepp, in 
prep).
Microsoft Study: Microsoft AI Economy Institute (2025). AI Diffusion Report: Where AI is most used, developed, and built. Microsoft.
Appel, R. et al. (2025). The Anthropic Economic Index report: Uneven geographic and enterprise AI adoption. Anthropic.
Chatterji, A. et al. (2025). How people use ChatGPT. NBER Working Paper.
Maslej, N. et al. (2025). The AI Index 2025 Annual Report. Institute for Human-Centered AI, Stanford University.
Microsoft Study: Slaughter,  I. and Daepp, M. (in prep.). Second-level digital divides in usage of a generative AI chatbot.
15

=== 第 16 页 ===
Adoption and Usage
aka.ms/nfw
Synthetic data and representative evaluations are advancing LLMs for diverse 
languages and cultures
•
Thoughtfully constructed, culturally-grounded synthetic data has shown promise in reducing the data gap between high-
resource and under-resourced languages (Guduru et al., 2025). The Updesh project (Chitale et al., 2025) provides a 
framework for culturally-grounded multilingual synthetic data and a case study on Indian languages shows improved 
performance of models fine-tuned on this data.
•
Coverage, representativeness, scalability, and trust 
continue to pose significant challenges in multilingual 
and multicultural evaluation. The Samiksha project 
(Hamna et al., 2025) addresses these issues by developing 
benchmarks from the ground up by incorporating inputs 
from a wide range of stakeholders and community 
members. 
•
Samiksha aims to establish a realistic and 
representative benchmark for Indian languages that 
reflects key use cases. 
•
Insights from such assessments can contribute to 
building models that perform effectively in various 
languages and cultural contexts.
The Samiksha benchmark creation and evaluation pipeline. Feedback on what to evaluate is provided by Civil 
Society Organizations (CSOs), data workers expand themes into data points in their own languages, adding 
cultural context when appropriate; responses from LLMs are evaluated using human evaluation and LLM-
judges (Hamna et al., 2025).
Guduru, M. et al. (2025). BhashaKritika: Building Synthetic Pretraining Data at Scale for Indic Languages. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Chitale, P. et al. (2025). The role of synthetic data in Multilingual, Multi-cultural AI systems: Lessons from Indic Languages. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Hamna et al. (2025). Building Benchmarks from the Ground Up: Community-Centered Evaluation of LLMs in Healthcare Chatbot Settings. arXiv Working Paper.
16

=== 第 17 页 ===
Impact on Work and Labor Markets
aka.ms/nfw
AI use is associated with time savings and productivity gains
•
Surveyed ChatGPT Enterprise users attribute 40–60 minutes saved per day from use 
of AI (Chatterji et al., 2025). The savings are heterogeneous. LLM-based estimates of 
time savings from Claude usage suggested they varied by occupation and task—for 
example, 80–85% for legal and management tasks, but only 20% for checking 
diagnostic images (Tamkin & McCrory, 2025).
•
OpenAI designed 1,320 tasks to mimic the work product of predominantly digital 
occupations in high-value sectors. Frontier LLMs approached quality parity with 
human experts: the win+tie shares for the top model ranged from 33-56% across 
industries and tie rates were low (Patwardhan et al., 2025). 
•
To see how time spent on tasks varied with Copilot usage, researchers 
developed WorkflowView, which uses an LLM to categorize telemetry action 
sequences into high-level workflow activities (Verma & Counts, 2025).
•
Privacy-preserving analysis of one month of telemetry of 50k Copilot-enabled 
Word users shows an average difference of 7 minutes per accepted Copilot 
output.
•
Copilot use is associated with a difference of 10.7 minutes in editing of content 
and 0.6 minutes in applying themes and styles. These variations can guide more 
effective integration of AI tools in productivity workflows.
Average time spent by WorkflowView Activity and Copilot usage (Verma & 
Counts, 2025)
Chatterji, R. et al. (2025). The state of enterprise AI. OpenAI
Tamkin, A. and McCrory, P. (2025). Estimating productivity gains from Claude conversations. Anthropic.
Patwardhan, T. et al. (2025). GDPval: Evaluating AI model performance on real world economically valuable tasks. arXiv Working Paper. 
Microsoft Study: Verma, G. and Counts, S. (2025). WorkflowView: Abstracting Activity Logs with LLMs for Interpretable and Actionable Insights. Under review. 
17

=== 第 18 页 ===
Impact on Work and Labor Markets
aka.ms/nfw
The rise of AI “workslop” has productivity risks and market effects
•
AI “workslop” refers to AI-generated work content that appears useful but lacks 
substance, is incomplete, or contains inaccuracies. Such content undermines 
productivity by forcing recipients to interpret, correct, or redo the work 
(Niederhoffer et al., 2025; Madsen & Puyt, 2025). Workslop may be a key reason 
why individual productivity gains are not seen at the group or organizational level.
•
In Niederhoffer et al.’s (2025) survey of 1,150 U.S. employees, 40% received 
workslop in the past month, estimated at 15% of content. Most slop flows between 
peers (40%), but it also moves upward (18%) and downward (16%) in hierarchies.
•
Workslop is part of the broader generative AI “slop” phenomenon, which is 
reshaping markets by flooding them with low-cost and low-quality content (Miklian 
& Hoelscher, 2025; Tullis, 2025; Pendergrass et al., 2025). 
•
Technical solutions are still nascent. One approach to metrics focuses on judging 
information utility, information quality, and style quality (Shaib et al., 2025), but this 
would need to be combined with accuracy checks (e.g. MAD-Fact by Ning et al., 
2025), ideally with access to internal data or document repositories.
•
Employee training about awareness of AI limitations and critical evaluation skills 
can reduce workslop by helping people identify and correct low-value outputs 
before they enter workflows (Park et al., 2025; Simkute et al., 2024).
Issue
Definition
Consequence
Volume
Scale and abundance of 
generative output
Crowding out human 
creativity and visibility
Velocity
Speed of production and 
circulation 
Outpacing fact-checking 
and moderation
Variety
Range of forms, genres, 
and modalities
Expansion into all cultural 
and knowledge domains
Value
Erosion of cultural and 
epistemic worth 
Devaluation of originality 
and meaning
Verification
Problems of truth, trust, 
and reliability 
Epistemic pollution and 
misinformation
Visibility
Algorithmic amplification 
and ranking 
Rewarding slop via 
platform incentives 
Virality
Meme-like diffusion and 
contagious spread
Rapid uptake and 
normalization of slop
The 7Vs of AI Slop (Adapted from Madsen & Puyt, 2025).
Niederhoffer, K. et al. (2025). AI-Generated “Workslop” Is Destroying Productivity. Harvard Business Review.
Madsen, D. Ø. and Puyt, R.W. (2025). The 7Vs of AI Slop: A Typology of Generative Waste. SSRN Working Paper.
Miklian, J. and Hoelscher, K. (2025). A New Digital Divide? Coder Worldviews, the Slop Economy, and Democracy in the Age of AI. arXiv Working Paper.
Tullis, J. (2025). Sifting Through the Slop: How Generative AI Created a Market for Lemons for Text-Based Works. SSRN Working Paper. 
Pendergrass, W. et al. (2025). A strategic cycle of slop: Understanding the commodification of AI feculence and its place in the attention economy. Issues in Information Systems.
Shaib, C. et al. (2025). Measuring AI "Slop" in Text. arXiv Working Paper.
Ning, Y. et al. (2025). MAD-Fact: A Multi-Agent Debate Framework for Long-Form Factuality Evaluation in LLMs . arXiv Working Paper.
Park, J., et al. (2025). Attitudes towards artificial intelligence at work: Scale development and validation. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology.
Microsoft Study: Simkute, A. et al. (2024). Ironies of Generative AI: Understanding and Mitigating Productivity Loss in Human-AI Interaction. IJHCI.
18

=== 第 19 页 ===
Impact on Work and Labor Markets
aka.ms/nfw
Labor market outcomes cannot be predicted based on existing limited 
evidence on automation vs augmentation 
•
Researchers have tried to categorize which tasks are more likely to be augmented or automated by generative AI, either in 
theory using an LLM classifier (Eloundou et al., 2024) or by analyzing what users are trying to achieve in conversations with 
LLMs as distinct from what activities the LLM is performing (Tomlinson et al., 2025).
•
However, the technical question of what activities can be delegated to the tools versus which activities it can assist with cannot 
answer the labor market question of which occupations will see increases or decreases in employment or wages.
•
Employment and wages depend on how occupations are restructured and whether there is market demand for increased 
output.
•
When ATMs were invented, tellers’ jobs were refactored to focus on other tasks and employment increased.
•
Theory suggests that wages are most likely to increase when the tasks that are automated are the ones requiring less 
expertise than other activities that are part of that occupation (Autor & Thompson, 2025).
•
Researchers have also elicited workers’ preferences about which tasks they would prefer to have automated (Shao et al., 2025).
•
Work preferences may predict the tasks for which AI will be adopted. They may also mediate the effect on wages if workers 
need to be paid more to use AI for some tasks than for others.
•
The top reasons given for wanting automation were freeing up time for high-value work, tasks being repetitive or tedious, 
and improving the quality of work.
•
Evidence on new tasks – that were not being done prior to AI – requires more research (and more time for them to emerge).
Eloundou, T. et al. (2024). GPTs are GPTs: Labor market impact potential of LLMs . Science
Microsoft Study: Tomlinson, K. et al. (2025). Working with AI: Measuring the Applicability of Generative AI to Occupations. arXiv Working Paper.
Autor, D. and Thompson, N. (2025). Expertise. NBER Working paper.
Shao, Y et al. (2025). Future of Work with AI Agents: Auditing Automation and Augmentation Potential across the U.S. Workforce. arXiv Working Paper.
19

=== 第 20 页 ===
Impact on Work and Labor Markets
aka.ms/nfw
Aggregate effects remain small, but early-career employment impacts from 
AI are emerging
•
Large-scale studies in Denmark and the US find no significant effect of AI on 
unemployment (Chen et al., 2025), working hours (Humlum & Vestergaard, 2025), or 
job openings (Hartley et al., 2025). However, hiring of AI talent has increased by 
more than 300% over the past eight years (LinkedIn, 2025).
•
For earnings, results vary from slightly increased earnings (Hartley et al., 2025), 
especially for occupations with high AI exposure (Chen et al., 2025), to no 
significant effects (e.g., Humlum & Vestergaard, 2025) to reduced salaries in 
high-wage occupations (Klein Teeselink, 2025).
•
There is evidence of negative effects for younger workers, whose roles rely less on 
tacit experience, making them more vulnerable to automation and less shielded by 
firm-specific skills. Declines for younger workers might be offset by growth among 
older workers and less-exposed occupations. 
•
Payroll data suggests employment for workers aged 22–25 in highly AI-exposed jobs fell by about 13% compared to less-
exposed roles. The authors tested for firm-level shocks, remote work, and sector-specific effects but note they cannot fully 
rule out other trends influencing exposed occupations (Brynjolfsson et al., 2025).
•
Resume and job posting evidence shows hiring for junior/entry-level roles slows in exposed occupations after firms adopt 
AI (Hosseini & Lichtinger, 2025; Klein Teeselink, 2025).
Difference between employment at firms adopting and not adopting 
generative AI, separately for junior and senior employee (Hosseini & 
Lichtinger, 2025).
Chen, D. et al. (2025). The (Short-Term) Effects of Large Language Models on Unemployment and Earnings. arXiv Working Paper.
Humlum, A. and Vestergaard, E. (2025). Large Language Models, Small Labor Market Effects. NBER Working Paper.
Hartley, J. et al. (2025). The Labor Market Effects of Generative Artificial Intelligence. SSRN Working Paper.
LinkedIn. (2025). Work Change Report. AI is Coming to Work.
Klein Teeselink, B. (2025). Generative AI and Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from the United Kingdom. SSRN Working Paper.
Brynjolfsson, E. et al. (2025). Canaries in the Coal Mine? Six Facts about the Recent Employment Effects of Artificial Intelligence. Working Paper. 
Hosseini, S. M. and Lichtinger, G. (2025). Generative AI as Seniority-Biased Technological Change: Evidence from U.S. Résumé and Job Posting Data. SSRN Working Paper.
20

=== 第 21 页 ===
Impact on Work and Labor Markets
aka.ms/nfw
AI adoption is reshaping career paths and skill requirements within 
occupations
•
Recent evidence suggests AI adoption affects career decisions and occupational mobility. Workers using AI chatbots are more 
likely to switch occupations (Humlum & Vestergaard, 2025), and search intensity for apprenticeships in cognitive and 
language-intensive fields has declined after chatbot introduction, signaling shifts in career preferences (Goller et al., 2025).
•
Worker-level evidence from Germany shows AI exposure changes the mix of activities and required skills inside occupations. 
Unlike robots, AI reduces non-routine abstract tasks and increases demand for high-level routine tasks like oversight and 
evaluation (Engberg et al., 2025; Gathmann et al., 2024). AI adoption increases complexity in augmentation-prone roles while 
reducing skill requirements in automation-prone roles (Chen et al., 2024).
•
Roles requiring AI skills are nearly twice as likely to also request analytical thinking, resilience, ethics, or digital literacy. A 
doubling of AI-specific job postings is associated with roughly 5% higher demand for these complementary skills, while 
demand for easily substitutable tasks such as basic data skills or translation declines slightly (Mäkelä & Stephany, 2025). Job 
postings requiring AI skills are growing over 70% year-over-year, extending beyond technical roles (LinkedIn, 2025a; 2025b).
•
Workers exposed to AI gain most from retraining focused on broad skills rather than narrow AI-specific roles. Encouragingly, 
occupations exposed to AI show strong adaptive capacity, suggesting retraining can work if job loss occurs (Hyman et al., 2025; 
Manning & Aguirre, 2025). Separately, experimental evidence suggests that while generative AI can enable non-technical 
workers to perform technical tasks, these gains may be temporary and dependent on continued tool use; workers lose the 
capability to perform those tasks once access ends, indicating no lasting skill development (Wiles et al., 2024).
Humlum, A. and Vestergaard, E. (2025). Large Language Models, Small Labor Market Effects. NBER Working Paper.
Goller, D. et al. (2025). This time it's different – Generative artificial intelligence and occupational choice. Labour Economics.
Engberg, E. et al. (2025). Artificial intelligence, tasks, skills and wages: Worker-level evidence from Germany. Research Policy.
Gathmann, C. et al. (2024). AI, Task Changes in Jobs, and Worker Reallocation. CESifo Working Paper.
Chen, W. X.  et al. (2024). Displacement or Complementarity? The Labor Market Impact of  Generative AI . HBS Working Paper.
Mäkelä, E. and Stephany, F. (2025). Complement or substitute? How AI increases the demand for human skills. Working Paper.
LinkedIn. (2025a). AI Labor Market Update. Tracking AI Adoption and skills in the U.S. economy. 
LinkedIn. (2025b). LinkedIn Skills on the Rise 2025: The 15 fastest-growing skills in the U.S.
Hyman, B. et al. (2025). How Retrainable are AI-Exposed Workers? Working Paper.
Manning, S. and Aguirre, T. (2025). How Adaptable Are American Workers to AI-Induced Job Displacement? NBER Working Paper.
Wiles, E. et al. (2024). GenAI as an Exoskeleton: Experimental Evidence on Knowledge Workers Using GenAI on New Skills. SSRN Working Paper.
21

=== 第 22 页 ===
Impact on Work and Labor Markets
aka.ms/nfw
Theory suggests AI shifts the value of work toward human judgment and 
decision making
•
While empirical evidence on AI's long-term impact is still emerging, theoretical work is shaping our understanding of possible 
future scenarios and the complex ways AI could transform work, expertise and organizations (del Rio-Chanona et al., 2025).
•
AI might act as a "bicycle for the mind," boosting output and initially narrowing inequality by automating routine work. As AI 
advances, human judgment becomes increasingly critical – recognizing improvement opportunities and selecting the right 
action under ambiguity – areas tied to context, ethics, and creativity where AI still struggles (Agrawal et al., 2025a). Whether this 
increases inequality between workers depends on how autonomously AI is used and on users’ skill levels (Ide & Talamàs, 2025).
•
By turning hidden, local knowledge into data that can be shared and analyzed, AI lets companies coordinate on a larger scale 
(Brynjolfsson & Hitzig, 2025). This may favor bigger organizations and centralized decision-making. However, automating too 
much – especially entry-level work – risks losing hands-on learning and tacit skills that drive long-term innovation (Ide, 2025). 
•
As AI gets more powerful, it can automate not only routine but also expert-level tasks, making economic growth and wages 
increasingly dependent on compute rather than labor. If AI takes over work closer to the existing knowledge frontier and 
humans retain a comparative advantage mostly on the far frontier, where entirely new knowledge must be created, humans 
may focus even more on the most creative and novel challenges (Restrepo, 2025; Agrawal et al., 2025b; Celis et al., 2025).
•
The increasing power of AI also allows it to automate chains of tasks in a production process. A task where a human has an 
advantage over AI may nonetheless be automated if it is adjacent to tasks where AI performs well. This can result in non-linear 
productivity gains that arise when marginal improvements in AI trigger discrete reorganizations of work (Demirer et al., 2025).
del Rio-Chanona, R. M. et al. (2025). AI and Jobs: A Review of Theory, Estimates and Evidence. arXiv Working paper.
Agrawal, A. et al. (2025a). The Economics of Bicycles for the Mind: Artificial Intelligence, Computers, and the Division of Labor. SSRN Working Paper.
Ide, E. and Talamàs, E. (2025). Artificial Intelligence in the Knowledge Economy. Journal of Political Economy.
Brynjolfsson, E. and Hitzing, Z. (2025). AI's Use of Knowledge in Society. NBER Working Paper.
Ide, E. (2025). Automation, AI and the Intergenerational Transmission of Knowledge. arXiv Working paper.
Restrepo, P. (2025). We Won't Be Missed: Work and Growth in the Era of AGI. Working Paper.
Agrawal, A. et al. (2025b). Genius on Demand: The Value of Transformative Artificial Intelligence. NBER Working Paper.
Celis, L. E. et al. (2025). A Mathematical Framework for AI-Human Integration in Work. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Demirer, M. et al. (2025). The Economic Impacts of Generative AI on the Structure of Work. Working Paper.
22

=== 第 23 页 ===
Impact on Work and Labor Markets
aka.ms/nfw
Automation tends to cap upside – augmentation and innovation expand 
opportunity
•
A version of this figure has appeared in the last two New 
Future of Work Reports, but it remains as important (if not 
more) today.
•
Automation-first approaches mainly remove cost from 
existing tasks, limiting gains to labor arbitrage and 
replication (Brynjolfsson, 2022; Autor, 2022).
•
Strategies focused on augmentation and innovation can 
create new categories of work and value, driving positive-
sum growth. For instance, Amazon’s success came from 
reinventing retail through human–machine 
complementarity, not automating cashiers. 
•
Automation also risks reducing the autonomy, recognition, and connection workers receive (making work less “meaningful”), 
all of which matter for engagement, performance, and wellbeing (Bailey et al., 2019; Allen et al., 1990). 
•
Automation without augmentation or innovation can also reduce worker bargaining power, thereby concentrating wealth and 
power and amplifying inequality (Brynjolfsson, 2022).
Opportunities for augmenting humans are far greater than opportunities to automate existing tasks (Adapted from 
Brynjolfsson, 2022).
Brynjolfsson, E. (2022). The Turing Trap: The Promise & Peril of Human-Like Artificial Intelligence. Daedalus.
Autor, D. (2022). The Labor Market Impacts of Technological Change: From Unbridled Enthusiasm to Qualified Optimism to Vast Uncertainty. NBER Working Paper.
Bailey, C. et al. (2019). A Review of the Empirical Literature on Meaningful Work: Progress and Research Agenda Human Resource Development Review.
Allen, B. A. et al. (1990). Outcomes of Meaningful Work: A Meta-Analysis. Journal of Management Studies. 
23

=== 第 24 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
Establishing common ground is essential for human-AI collaboration (1)
•
Common ground is the shared knowledge and assumptions that allow people to understand each other and coordinate effectively. 
•
Building common ground is essential to human communication and is increasingly recognized as important in human-AI interaction. 
•
Common ground is achieved through a 
dynamic process called grounding: speakers 
provide ongoing evidence of their 
understanding or confusion, and work to 
address gaps in mutual understanding (Clark 
& Brennan, 1991; Clark, 1996).
•
Grounding includes positive evidence of 
understanding, such as acknowledgments, 
relevant next conversational turns, and 
continued attention as well as negative 
evidence, such as requests for clarification. 
•
Current LLMs generate language with less 
conversational grounding than people, 
instead generating text that suggests that 
shared understanding has already been 
reached (Shaikh et al., 2024; see figure for 
examples). 
Examples of grounding acts from Shaikh et al. (2024). GPT-3.5 does not show grounding behaviors in response to the same statements.
Clark, H. H. and Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In: Perspectives on socially shared cognition. APA. 
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge University Press.
Shaikh, O. et al. (2024). Grounding Gaps in Language Model Generations. arXiv Working Paper.
24

=== 第 25 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
Establishing common ground is essential for human-AI collaboration (2)
•
Bansal et al. (2024) identify 12 challenges to establishing common 
ground in human-agent interaction, including general communication 
challenges (e.g. choosing the appropriate level of detail), challenges with 
conveying information from a user to an agent (e.g. in relation to goals 
and preferences), and challenges with conveying information from an 
agent to a user (e.g. in relation to its capabilities, current and planned 
actions, and their side effects).
•
Tolzin and Janson (2025) identify five mechanisms that could support 
common ground in human-agent interaction: support for joint action, an 
underlying knowledge base, mental models, social features, and 
embodiment. 
•
Shaikh et al. (2025) study grounding by analyzing LLM interaction logs. 
They find that early grounding failures predicted later interaction 
breakdowns. They develop a preliminary intervention aimed at mitigating 
grounding failures. This prompts the model to ask follow-up questions or 
request clarifications when predicted to be necessary. 
•
Other recent advances seek to support the user’s overall goal over 
multiple turns. COLLABLLM (Wu et al., 2025; see figure) results in higher 
task performance and interactivity, and work by Poelitz and McKenna 
(2025) improved models’ ability to generate clarifications and incorporate 
user-initiated corrections.
COLLABLLM (Wu et al., 2025) incorporates multi-turn rewards from collaborative simulation, 
resulting in better task completion and more efficient and interactive conversations.
Microsoft Study: Bansal, G. et al. (2024). Challenges in Human-Agent Communication. arXiv Working Paper. 
Tolzin, A., and Janson, A. (2025). Uncovering the mechanisms of common ground in human–agent interaction: review and future directions for conversational agent research. Internet Research. 
Microsoft Study: Shaikh, O. et al. (2025). Navigating Rifts in Human-LLM Grounding: Study and Benchmark. ACL Anthology. 
Microsoft Study: Wu, S. et al. (2025). CollabLLM: From Passive Responders to Active Collaborators. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Poelitz, C., and McKenna, N. (2025). Synthetic Clarification and Correction Dialogues about Data-Centric Tasks - A Teacher-Student Approach. arXiv Working Paper.
25

=== 第 26 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
Human-AI co-creation is shifting from one-shot outputs to context-aware, 
interaction-driven partnerships
•
Modern LLMs have fundamentally shifted content creation workflows from assuming perfect 
results in a single attempt to engaging in iterative, multi-turn collaborative refinement 
(Mysore et al., 2025). This transformation reflects both technological advances in LLM 
capabilities and profound changes in how users perceive and interact with AI (Reza et al., 
2025), increasingly viewing it as a creative partner rather than a passive tool (Wan et al., 2024). 
•
These patterns are emerging consistently across diverse domains—from writing and design 
(Zhou et al., 2024) to workplace communication (Das et al., in prep.) and software 
development (Deineha et al., 2025).
•
Large-scale empirical analysis of real-world LLM-assisted writing reveals that users rarely 
accept AI's initial outputs passively. Instead, they engage in complex, multi-turn dialogues 
characterized by Prototypical Human-AI Collaboration Behaviors (PATHs)—including revising 
intents, exploring alternatives, asking clarifying questions, and iteratively adjusting style and 
content (Mysore et al., 2025).
•
Recent studies show modern AI enables non-linear collaboration frameworks where humans 
and AI iteratively diverge (exploring ideas) and converge (refining toward consensus), 
replacing rigid task delegation. This shift mirrors creative prototyping—users experiment, test 
alternatives, and refine through iterative feedback (Zhou et al., 2024; Yukita et al., 2025).
Users follow up their original requests to collaborate 
with LLMs in writing sessions. Mysore et al. (2025) 
identify prototypical human-AI collaboration behaviors 
(PATHs) and find statistically significant correlations 
between users’ writing intents and PATHs.
Microsoft Study: Mysore, S. et al. (2025). Prototypical Human-AI Collaboration Behaviors from LLM-Assisted Writing in the Wild. EMNLP.
Reza, M. et al. (2025). Co-Writing with AI, on Human Terms: Aligning Research with User Demands Across the Writing Process. CSCW.
Wan, Q. et al. (2024). "It Felt Like Having a Second Mind": Investigating Human-AI Co-creativity in Prewriting with Large Language Models. CSCW.
Zhou, J. et al. (2024). Understanding Nonlinear Collaboration between Human and AI Agents: A Co-design Framework for Creative Design. CHI.
Microsoft Study: Das, D. et al. (in prep.). Not Just My Style: Toward Contextual Personalization in AI-Assisted Workplace Communication. 
Deineha, O. et al. (2025). Human–AI Cooperation in Pair Programming (GPT-4 vs Code Llama). Information Technology and Computer Engineering.
Yukita, D et al. (2025). Reassessing Collaborative Writing Theories and Frameworks in the Age of LLMs: What Still Applies and What We Must Leave Behind. arXiv Working Paper. 
26

=== 第 27 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
Collaborative human-AI decision-making can be made more effective 
through understanding, trust, and precision
•
In theory, AI can leverage large information sources to help human users in decision-
making.  However, this potential can be hampered by misunderstanding, distrust, and a 
lack of accuracy. Mitigating these issues is key to leveraging AI in joint decision-making.
•
Imperfect understanding of user objectives can cause aligned AI agents to act as if they 
are misaligned. This can result in poorer decisions relative to a no-AI world despite the 
information processing advantage of AI (Liang, 2025).
•
Humans overestimate AI alignment and misestimate AI’s capabilities when using 
human-perceived difficulty as a metric. This in turn leads to suboptimal AI adoption 
decisions (Dreyfuss & Raux, 2025; He et al., 2025).
•
To assist a human decision-maker, AI can expose key aspects of a decision problem and 
explain models. This can lead to improved long-term human decision-making but risks 
over-emphasizing certain aspects of the decision space and decreasing accuracy in the 
short-term (Noti et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025).
•
The ability for a human to choose whether and when to delegate to AI – based on 
available information – can improve decision-making, especially when the AI accounts 
for this selective delegation in its responses (Greenwood et al., 2025).
The choice to collaborate with and/or delegate to an AI agent involves 
relative trust in AI capabilities and information sources vs. human 
counterparts, modulated by the context of the decision problem and 
individual preferences (Galindez-Acosta & Giraldo-Huertas, 2025).
Liang, A. (2025). Artificial Intelligence Clones. EC.
Dreyfuss, B. and Raux, R. (2025). Human Learning about AI. EC.
He, K. et al. (2025). Human Misperception of Generative-AI Alignment: A Laboratory Experiment. EC.
Noti, G. et al. (2025). AI-Assisted Decision Making with Human Learning. EC.
Yang, K. H. et al. (2025). Explaining Models. SSRN Working Paper.
Greenwood, S. et al. (2025). Designing Algorithmic Delegates: the Role of Indistinguishability in Human-AI Handoff. EC.
Galindez-Acosta, J. S. and Giraldo-Huertas, J. J. (2025). Trust in AI emerges from distrust in humans: A machine learning study on decision-making guidance. arXiv Working Paper.
27

=== 第 28 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
AI agents will transform markets as humans delegate market actions to 
agents operating on their behalf
•
AI agents such as OpenAI’s Operator (now ChatGPT agent mode) 
and Amazon Rufus can search, match, and even transact on behalf 
of users in markets (OpenAI, 2025; Amazon, 2025). This use case 
drives research on market structures and outcomes when AI agents 
buy and sell on behalf of consumers and firms (Rothschild et al., 
Forthcoming; Hadfield & Koh, 2025; Shahidi et al., 2025).
•
Theory suggests an open marketplace that allows third-party 
agents will have better societal outcomes than closed “walled 
garden” platforms where agents are managed by a central 
organization (Rothschild et al., Forthcoming; Marro & Torr, 2025).
•
Simulations suggest agentic markets can surpass the performance of traditional markets limited by human attention and 
communication, but doing so requires designing agents and interactions that overcome biases such as position bias and 
first-proposal bias (Allouah et al., 2025; Bansal et al., 2025).
•
Benefits of agent markets include better matches, lower costs, expanded and democratized market access, and improved 
scalability. Risks include AI alignment issues, concentration of market power, algorithmic collusion, and security concerns, 
but these can be mitigated through market design (Rothschild et al., 2025; Rusak et al., 2025; Hammond et al., 2025).
In an agentic market, AI agents buy and sell on behalf of customers and businesses. A 
marketplace platform can support key market features and systems including search, reputation, 
communication, and transaction. Simulation tools can be used to study the market-wide impact 
of delegating market actions to AI agents and guide platform design choices  (Bansal et al., 2025).
OpenAI (2025). Introducing Operator: A research preview of an agent that can use its own browser to perform tasks for you. OpenAI.
Amazon (2025). Amazon’s next-gen AI assistant for shopping is now even smarter, more capable, and more helpful. Amazon.
Microsoft Study: Rothschild, D. M. et al. (Forthcoming). The Agentic Economy. CACM.
Hadfield, G. K. and Koh, A. (2025). An Economy of AI Agents. CACM.
Shahidi, P. et al. (2025). The Coasean Singularity? Demand, Supply, and Market Design with AI Agents. NBER Working Paper.
Marro, S. and Torr, P. (2025). LLM Agents Are the Antidote to Walled Gardens. arXiv Working Paper.
Allouah, A. et al. (2025). What Is Your AI Agent Buying? Evaluation, Implications, and Emerging Questions for Agentic E-Commerce. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Bansal, G. et al. (2025). Magentic Marketplace: An Open-Source Environment for Studying Agentic Markets. arXiv Working Paper.
Rusak, G. et al. (2025). AI Agents Can Enable Superior Market Designs. Working Paper.
Hammond, L. et al. (2025). Multi-Agent Risks from Advanced AI. Corporate AI Foundation.
28

=== 第 29 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
Effective oversight of agents likely requires UX innovations for transparency
•
Human oversight of agentic AI systems requires knowledge and observability. It 
requires knowledge about the capabilities, limitations, and workings of the system, as 
well as domain expertise and situational awareness to enable intervention. And it 
requires observability of system activity, decisions, and outputs (Bansal et al., 2024; 
Passi, 2025; Shavit et al., 2023).
•
Whether human oversight happens as real-time monitoring or post-hoc auditing, it is 
very challenging. Information volume, complexity, and speed make it tremendously 
difficult for people to exercise meaningful human oversight (Holzinger et al., 
2024; Lane et al., 2024; Passi, 2025).
•
Three sociotechnical challenges compound the difficulty of human oversight:
•
Agentic systems struggle with the goal-plan-execution gap, arising from 
mismatches between how users describe goals to systems, how systems interpret 
and plan for user goals, and how these plans fare in real-world contexts.
Microsoft Study: Bansal, G. et al. (2024). Challenges in Human-Agent Communication. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Passi, S. (2025). Agentic AI has a Human Oversight Problem. SSRN Working Paper.
Shavit, Y. et al. (2023). Practices for Governing Agentic AI Systems. OpenAI.
Holzinger, A. et al. (2024). Is human oversight to AI systems still possible? New Biotechnology. 
Lane, J. et al. (2024). Narrative AI and the Human-AI Oversight Paradox in Evaluating Early-Stage Innovations. HBS Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Wang, Y. and Lu, Y. (2025). Interaction, process, infrastructure: A unified architecture for human-agent collaboration. arXiv Working Paper.
Pang, R. Y. et al. (2025). Interactive Reasoning: Visualizing and Controlling Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in Large Language Models. arXiv Working Paper.
•
UX improvements are needed to reduce the burden of human oversight, such as: curating and organizing information, 
enabling interactive sensemaking, using visual summaries, and highlighting real-time changes. Dynamic, personalized 
interfaces are a promising direction (Wang & Lu, 2025).
29
A tree visualization of the reasoning steps in a chain-of-thought 
process designed to help people understand and provided feedback to 
an AI system (Pang et al. 2025).
•
Spotting mistakes from agentic systems is a formidable task that can be akin to finding the needle in the haystack.
•
What is useful to observe in the workings of agentic systems is contextual.

=== 第 30 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
Cognitively engaging in human-AI collaboration yields better performance 
than passive reception of AI recommendations, yet is not always preferred
•
When clinicians were offered an LLM to assist with diagnostic reasoning on 
vignettes describing diagnostic challenges, their AI-assisted performance was 
only slightly better than when using conventional resources, and not as good 
as the LLM alone (Goh et al., 2024). However, when the LLM was instructed to 
engage in a collaborative workflow that compared and synthesized AI and 
clinician perspectives, clinicians’ performance was boosted to be significantly 
better than using conventional resources and on par with the LLM working 
alone (Everett et al., 2025).
•
Researchers observed that the LLM tended to agree with the physician’s input 
even when instructed to generate an independent opinion, likely due to 
sycophancy; the team is following up on these findings (Everett et al., 2025).
•
Reicherts et al. (2025) found that, for a financial trading task, a more cognitively engaging AI that encourages reflection and 
provides feedback helped participants build more diversified portfolios and understand portfolio weaknesses. Some people 
appreciated that it helped them think for themselves, but it was perceived as less insightful and more cognitively demanding. 
•
Le et al. (2024) showed that a cognitively engaging, evidence-for-and-against approach improved decisions and reduced 
overreliance on incorrect AI outputs; however, it was harder to use than recommendation-based AI, occasionally 
overwhelming for beginners. The cognitively engaging version was preferred by both novices and experts in high-uncertainty 
situations, with some experts favoring recommendations in straightforward cases.
Display of synthesis of AI and clinician input with AI critiques (Everett et al., 2025).
30
Microsoft Study: Goh, E. et al. (2024). Large language model influence on diagnostic reasoning: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA network open.
Microsoft Study: Everett et al. (2025). From tool to teammate: A randomized controlled trial of clinician-AI collaborative workflows for diagnosis. medRxiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Reicherts, L. et al. (2025). AI, help me think—but for myself: Assisting people in complex decision-making by providing different kinds of cognitive support. CHI.
Le, T. et al. (2024). From evidence to decision: Exploring Evaluative AI. arXiv Working Paper.

=== 第 31 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
Human expertise types and levels must shape human-AI collaboration design
•
Designing and implementing AI-assisted workflows requires addressing the differences and interactions between types of 
expertise: expertise in a work domain, expertise in working with AI, and expertise in managing AI agents (Tankelevitch et al., 
2025). For example, domain experts (e.g. researchers, clinicians, creatives) may be better equipped to prompt, assess, and use 
AI outputs than those who are less expert (Shin et al., 2025; Siu and Fok, 2025; Tankelevitch et al., 2024).
•
Domain experts prefer delegating routine low-level tasks to AI, while retaining control over high-level tasks, such as analysis, 
synthesis, and interpretation (Cha & Wong, 2025; Yun et al., 2025; Fok et al., 2025; Ulloa et al., 2025; Choudhuri et al., 2025). 
Selective delegation is driven by factors including:
•
skepticism around AI performance (whether warranted or not)
•
desire to preserve professional identity and job satisfaction (e.g., craftsmanship), sense of responsibility and accountability 
(e.g., if things go wrong), and agency over complex workflows (e.g., providing oversight, mitigating bias or errors)
•
desire to maintain and grow expertise by “staying close to the data” for sensemaking and deeper insights
•
AI workflows may benefit from being designed for selective delegation, e.g., via affordances to adjust autonomy and defaults 
linked to task risks (Choudhuri et al., 2025; Siu & Fok, 2025; Ulloa et al., 2025).
•
To develop domain expertise and therefore also ensure appropriate human oversight of AI, AI workflows may benefit from 
enabling workers to calibrate their AI reliance and learn from human-AI interactions – e.g., by exposing intermediate AI 
reasoning and trade-offs (Cha & Wong, 2025; Siu & Fok, 2025; Choudhuri et al., 2025; Colombatto et al., 2025). 
Microsoft Study: Tankelevitch, L. et al. (2025). Understanding, Protecting, and Augmenting Human Cognition with Generative AI: A Synthesis of the CHI 2025 Tools for Thought Workshop. arXiv Working Paper.
Shin, J. et al. (2025). No Evidence for LLMs Being Useful in Problem Reframing. CHI.
Siu, A., and Fok, R. (2025). Augmenting Expert Cognition in the Age of Generative AI: Insights from Document-Centric Knowledge Work. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Tankelevitch, L. et al. (2024). The Metacognitive Demands and Opportunities of Generative AI. CHI.
Cha, I. and Wong, R. Y. (2025). Understanding Socio-technical Factors Configuring AI Non-Use in UX Work Practices. CHI.
Yun, B. et al. (2025). Generative AI in Knowledge Work: Design Implications for Data Navigation and Decision-Making. CHI.
Fok, R. et al. (2025). Toward Living Narrative Reviews: An Empirical Study of the Processes and Challenges in Updating Survey Articles in Computing Research. CHI.
Microsoft Study: Ulloa, M. et al. (2025). Product Manager Practices for Delegating Work to Generative AI:" Accountability Must Not be Delegated to Non-Human Actors. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Choudhuri, R. et al. (2025). AI Where It Matters: Where, Why, and How Developers Want AI Support in Daily Work. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Colombatto, C. et al. (2025). Metacognition and Confidence Dynamics in Advice Taking from Generative AI. arXiv Working Paper.
31

=== 第 32 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
Human roles are shifting, demanding new interfaces and skills for effective 
human-AI partnership
•
As AI capabilities transform co-creation workflows, human roles shift from executors to strategic coordinators and editorial 
decision-makers who guide, refine, and integrate AI contributions across writing (Yukita et al., 2025), design (Zhou et al., 2024), 
and coding (Deineha et al., 2025).
•
In AI pair programming, developers increasingly verify, edit, and assemble AI-generated code rather than writing from 
scratch—acting as critical editors and project coordinators (Deineha et al., 2025). 
•
Similarly, in writing and design contexts, users focus more on high-level composition or curation instead of producing every 
detail. This role shift calls for new skills: prompt crafting, vetting AI outputs, guiding AI to meet requirements, and maintaining 
oversight of quality (Deineha et al., 2025; Yukita et al., 2025). 
•
Unlocking this transformation requires interfaces and control mechanisms that maintain human agency. Research shows shared 
editing spaces foster greater user control, accuracy and efficiency than chat-only designs (Laban et al., 2024). Successful co-
creation depends on dynamic sharing of initiative across input, action, output, and feedback stages (Zhang et al., 2025) and 
flexible systems supporting both human-led and AI-led moments (Haase & Pokutta, 2024).
•
While recent studies advocate mixed-initiative interfaces that mirror human collaboration, Yukita et al. (2025) argue human-AI 
collaboration differs fundamentally from human-human models and require designing for the asymmetry. Likewise, studies in 
mathematics show AI can generate original constructions beyond human preconceptions, reaching “Level 4” co-creation where 
human and AI contribute equally (Haase & Pokutta, 2024). This synergy enables AI to support not only generation but also 
integration, coherence, and creative exploration.
Yukita, D. et al. (2025). Reassessing Collaborative Writing Theories and Frameworks in the Age of LLMs: What Still Applies and What We Must Leave Behind. arXiv Working Paper.
Zhou, J. et al. (2024). Understanding Nonlinear Collaboration between Human and AI Agents: A Co-design Framework for Creative Design. CHI.
Deineha, O. et al. (2025). Human–AI Cooperation in Pair Programming (GPT-4 vs Code Llama)
Laban, P. et al. (2024). Beyond the Chat: Executable and Verifiable Text-Editing with LLMs. UIST.
Zhang, S. et al. (2025). Exploring Collaboration Patterns and Strategies in Human-AI Co-creation through the Lens of Agency: A Scoping Review of the Top-tier HCI Literature. CSCW. 
Haase, J. and Pokutta, S. (2024). Human-AI Co-Creativity: Exploring Synergies Across Levels of Creative Collaboration. arXiv Working Paper.
32

=== 第 33 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
Multimodal AI interactions can help bridge communication gaps in low 
resource settings
•
Many AI systems rely on text and keyboard input, but communication preferences are deeply influenced by culture 
(Mengesha et al. 2021), technology, social practice, literacy levels, and practical factors. For example, frontline workers may 
not wish to type to interact with Al systems, nor read lengthy descriptions, preferring diagrams, audio, or video responses.
•
Research with rural farmers in Kenya and India (Abdulhamid et al., 2025) shows that multimodal input and output enhance 
users’ capacity to interact with AI systems when their first language is not English, yielding more useful and meaningful 
interactions with the systems. These modalities help users better articulate their needs (Singh et al., 2024) and assist models 
with intent identification (Jain et al., 2018).
•
Multimodal interactions such as voice, when paired with accurate automatic speech recognition in local languages, allows 
for more confident articulation of needs. Images enable easy communication of visual features such as disease or plant 
identification (Medhi-Thies et al., 2015; Jain et al., 2018) or interacting with construction diagrams. 
•
In a study using the multi-modal critical thinking agent (Kumar et al., 2024), farmers valued local video responses (Singh et 
al., 2024) for promoting community knowledge and providing actionable, contextual guidance to support the adoption of 
recommended practices.
Mengesha, Z. et al. (2021). “I don’t think these devices are very culturally sensitive”—Impact of automated speech recognition errors on African Americans. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence.
Microsoft Study: Abdulhamid, N. G. et al. (2025). Advancing AI to meet needs of the global majority. Microsoft Research.
Microsoft Study: Singh, N. et al. (2024). Farmer. Chat: Scaling AI-Powered Agricultural Services for Smallholder Farmers. arXiv Working Paper.
Jain, M., et al. (2018). FarmChat: A conversational agent to answer farmer queries. IMWUT.
Microsoft Study: Medhi-Thies, I. (2015). KrishiPustak: A social networking system for low-literate farmers. CSCW.
Microsoft Study: Kumar, S. et al. (2024). MMCTAgent: Multi-modal Critical Thinking Agent Framework for Complex Visual Reasoning. arXiv Working Paper.
33

=== 第 34 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
Orchestrator agents will likely have gradual, trust-based adoption
•
Research highlights challenges for designing multi-agentic systems; raising 
considerations on trust and explainability in these systems (Schömbs et al., 
2025). 
•
If the users only interact with a supervisor agent, the perception of trust may 
only depend on that agent's performance and behaviour. What happens if 
errors arise at sub-agent level? Agents will need to be able to surface relevant 
information without overwhelming the user. 
•
Agents will need new reasoning capabilities to predict people's behavior from 
their past actions and be able to explain their rationale behind choices and 
recommendations well enough for humans to understand (Gal & Grosz, 
2022).
•
In the realm of autonomy and trust, experts suggest that adopting a hybrid 
approach that combines both centralized and decentralized components into 
the workings of multi-agent systems to achieve 'controlled autonomy' within 
defined boundaries (Neural Sage, 2025). They define hybrid designs where 
“the central system can dynamically adjust the level of autonomy given to 
agents based on task complexity, confidence levels, or the agent’s 
performance history.” 
34
An illustration describing four agent architectures. First one is a single agent 
system while others are multi-agent architectures (Schömbs et al., 2025). 
Schömbs, S. et al. (2025). From Conversation to Orchestration: HCI Challenges and Opportunities in Interactive Multi-Agentic Systems. arXiv Working Paper.
Gal, K. and Grosz, B. J. (2022). Multi-Agent Systems: Technical & Ethical Challenges of Functioning in a Mixed Group. Ethics and AI 
Neural Sage (2025). Hybrid centralized and Decentralized architectures balancing control and autonomy in LLM agents. AI architecture

=== 第 35 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
Writing text without typing or dictating: a radical new UX unlocked by LLMs
•
Large Language Models demonstrate robust semantic 
comprehension and contextual coherence (derived from the 
Transformer architecture's attention mechanism) allowing them to 
perform complex text and data manipulation, including the 
creation of new, semantically equivalent structural variants and the 
generation of logically linking, transitional language (Vaswani et al., 
2017; Dilhara et al., 2024).
•
These capabilities can elevate writing from keystrokes to shaping 
meaning, allowing authors to focus on ideas, flow and semantic 
rather than spending time on wordsmithing.
•
Unlocking the full potential of LLMs, will require interaction 
paradigms that feel like creating with a new medium — hands-on 
operations that enable experimentation and focusing on the 
task, not the prompting.
•
Researchers are borrowing from familiar domains such as graphics 
editing (Textoshop: words as pixels, tones as colors) and material 
metaphors (Texterial: sculpting clay, pruning plants) so users can 
quickly grasp these interactions and focus on shaping outcomes 
rather than mechanics (Masson et al., 2025; Shen et al., 2025).
A vocabulary of gestures for shaping text as one would shape clay. Each gesture carries a 
specific meaning and triggers a large language model to rewrite the underlying text. This 
creates a direct, hands-on approach that encourages experimentation and exploration in 
shaping the final outcome (Shen et al., 2025).
Vaswani, A. et al. (2017). Attention Is All You Need. arXiv Working Paper.
Dilhara, M. et al. (2024). Unprecedented Code Change Automation: The Fusion of LLMs and Transformation by Example. ACM Software Engineering.
Masson, D. et al. (2025). Textoshop: Interactions Inspired by Drawing Software to Facilitate Text Editing. CHI.
Microsoft Study: Shen, J. et al. (2025). Texterial: A Text-as-Material Interaction Paradigm for LLM-Mediated Writing. Under Review.
35

=== 第 36 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
UI for AI systems should work across different timeframes
•
AI models can generate interfaces in real time for end-users, to support 
context-specific and personalized user experiences. AI-generated interfaces 
are often ephemeral. Examples include interfaces that are dynamically 
rendered to support in-the-moment prompting (Drosos et al., 2025), or that 
appear as scaffolds to support comprehension and exploration (Cheng et al., 
2024). 
•
Persistent UI plays a different role in human-AI interaction, extending to 
support for activities. DynaVis (Vaithilingam et al., 2024) generates persistent 
widgets to support edits to data visualizations, allowing the user to make 
further edits. JELLY (Cao et al., 2025) generates an interface in response to the 
user’s description of their task. The interface can then be customized through 
natural language and direct manipulation. 
•
Recent prototypes such as Anthropic’s Imagine with Claude show that 
generative UI can evolve over time in response to a user’s actions. This 
suggests the potential for interfaces to morph to fit the user’s changing 
activity (cf. Bardram et al., 2019), supporting focus (Rost, 2025). 
•
These prototypes point to the potential for generative UI to be co-created 
through human-AI interaction, supporting extended activities and workflows. 
Promptions is an example of ephemeral UI. In an image generator, from even the 
single word prompt “vibecoding”, dynamic prompt middleware can generate 
selectable options to easily steer the AI to a customized result (Drosos et al., 2025).
Microsoft Study: Drosos, I. et al. (2025). Dynamic Prompt Middleware: Contextual Prompt Refinement Controls for Comprehension Tasks. CHIWORK.
Cheng, R. et al. (2024). BISCUIT: Scaffolding LLM-generated code with ephemeral UIs in computational notebooks. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Vaithilingam, P. et al. (2024). DynaVis: Dynamically Synthesized UI Widgets for Visualization Editing. CHI.
Cao, R. et al. (2025). Generative and Malleable User Interfaces with Generative and Evolving Task-Driven Data Model. CHI.
Bardram, J. et al. (2019). Activity-centric computing systems. CACM. 
Rost, M. (2025). Reclaiming the Computer through LLM-Mediated Computing. ACM Interactions.
36

=== 第 37 页 ===
Human-AI Collaboration
aka.ms/nfw
In some cases, only another human will do
•
Perceptions of the comparative capabilities of humans and AI influence whether and how people use AI (Bankins et al., 2021). A 
common reason employees choose not to use AI is that they would prefer to interact with another person, finding AI “too 
opaque, emotionless, rigid and independent” (de Freitas, 2025).
•
Many jobs (for example, teachers, hairdressers, chaplains, therapists) involve “connective labor,” the work of creating emotional 
understanding to create valuable outcomes. Though some of the tasks of such work could be automated, when people engage 
in connective labor, it creates mutual dignity and purpose, and weaves the social fabric of society, outcomes only humans can 
co-create (Pugh, 2024).
•
There are five particularly human elements of connective labor. It uses the body, it involves reading and deploying emotions, it 
is collaborative, it responds to spontaneity, and it both makes and manages mistakes (Pugh, 2024).
•
Another survey found that resistance to AI adoption is mostly rooted in performance concerns, but for some occupations—
including caregiving, therapy, and spiritual leadership—automation is seen as morally repugnant (Friis & Riley, 2025).
•
Furthermore, use of AI alters interaction patterns and the sense that one’s work is recognized. AI-mediated teams may see 
reduced social interaction and belonging, as working with AI is known to alter human expression and encourage more 
transactional (rather than social) communication (Ju & Aral, 2025).
•
AI risks obscuring human contribution and reducing social recognition; producing content with AI is perceived as less 
rewarding than being ‘seen’ through collaboration with another person (Sadeghian & Hassenzahl, 2022).
Bankins, S. et al. (2021). A multilevel review of artificial intelligence in organizations. Journal of Organizational Behavior. 
de Freitas, J. (2025). Why People Resist Embracing AI. Harvard Business Review.
Pugh, A. (2024). The Last Human Job: The Work of Connecting in a Disconnected World. Princeton University Press. 
Friis, S. and Riley, J. W. (2025). Performance or Principle: Resistance to Artificial Intelligence in the U.S. Labor Market. HBS Working Paper.
Ju, H. and Aral, S. (2025). Collaborating with AI Agents:  A Field Experiment on Teamwork, Productivity, and Performance. arXiv Working Paper.  
Sadeghian, S. and Hassenzahl, M. (2022). The "Artificial" Colleague: Evaluation of Work Satisfaction in Collaboration with Non-human Coworkers. IUI. 
37

=== 第 38 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
AI currently works better for individuals than it does for teams, but improving 
collaborative AI systems is an active research area
•
AI has been more successful at improving productivity at the individual scale 
than at the team scale (Schmutz et al., 2024; Dell’Acqua et al., 2025; Yang et al. 
2025). 
•
Factors that have been identified as potential causes include instruction tuning 
practices (e.g. Laban et al., 2025; Nath et al., 2025), AIs having relatively limited 
knowledge of critical social dynamics like (interpersonal) grounding (Clark, 
1996), challenges with turn-taking dynamics and proactivity (Huang et al., 
2025; Liu et al., 2025), the need for new evaluation frameworks (e.g. Alsobay et 
al., 2025), and the substantially greater complexity of team goals vs. individual 
goals (Woolley, 2025).
•
Researchers are betting on two broad routes to improve AI for teams: (1) 
process-focused strategies, i.e. building AI to support specific team processes 
like information sharing (e.g. Huang et al., 2025) and (2) outcome-focused 
strategies, i.e. training end-to-end AI systems that attempt to learn from short- 
and long-range team outcomes (e.g. Nath et al., 2025).
Dell’Acqua et al. (2025) found that individuals w/ an AI did just as well as a 
team (pair) of people in a laboratory task, at least in terms of average 
performance.
Schmutz, J. B. et al. (2024). AI-teaming: Redefining collaboration in the digital era. Current Opinion in Psychology.
Dell’Acqua, F. et al. (2025). The Cybernetic Teammate: A Field Experiment on Generative AI Reshaping Teamwork and Expertise. HBS Working Paper.
Yang, D. et al. (2025). Socially Aware Language Technologies: Perspectives and Practices. ACL.
Microsoft Study: Laban, P. et al. (2025). LLMs Get Lost In Multi-Turn Conversation. arXiv Working Paper.
Nath, A. et al. (2025). Frictional Agent Alignment Framework: Slow Down and Don’t Break Things. ACL.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge University Press.
Huang, T. et al. (2025). Teaching Language Models To Gather Information Proactively. EMNLP.
Liu, X. et al. (2025). Proactive Conversational Agents with Inner Thoughts. CHI.
Microsoft Study: Alsobay, M. et al. (2025). Bringing Everyone to the Table: An Experimental Study of LLM-Facilitated Group Decision Making. arXiv Working Paper.
Woolley, A.W. (2025). Generative AI and collaboration: opportunities for cultivating collective intelligence. Journal of Organization Design.
38

=== 第 39 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
AI can unlock entirely new models of collaboration (and already has)
•
AI disrupts the fundamental collective intelligence dynamics that have led to traditional workplace team structures (Burton et 
al., 2024; Woolley, 2025), creating significant openings for radically new ways to collaborate.
•
One possible outcome is that much larger, more ephemeral teams – possibly challenging organizational boundaries – emerge 
as a prominent successful collective intelligence strategy (Valentine & Bernstein, 2025). This could occur if AI can fulfill its 
potential to significantly reduce the costs of aggregating intelligence from more and newer individuals (Burton et al., 2024). 
•
Another possible outcome is that teams get much smaller, possibly reducing to a single person collaborating with an 
increasingly powerful model. This is the “one-person unicorn” hypothesis (Ratcliffe, 2025).
•
There are also novel risks: The new models of collective intelligence could be less effective than before, with AI, for 
instance, reducing incentives for people to share knowledge with each other and with AI systems (Vincent, 2022). In enterprise 
settings, this can likely be addressed in part through novel credit assignment techniques and systems (e.g., Atmakuri et al., 
2025). 
•
Modern AI models can themselves be understood as amazing new forms of collective intelligence (McMahon et al., 2017; 
Lanier, 2023) and in fact “collective intelligence” is perhaps a more accurate term for technologies like LLMs than “artificial 
intelligence” (Li et al., 2023). LLMs take knowledge from millions of people who have written web content or posted in places 
like Reddit and Wikipedia, interacted with chatbot systems, and generated other types of data and make that available on-
demand to individuals. If the “one-person unicorn” hypothesis wins out, this would be the mechanism; these wouldn’t really 
be single-person companies, they would be the whole world generating value together. 
Burton, J. W. et al. (2024). How large language models can reshape collective intelligence. Nature Human Behaviour. 
Woolley, A.W. (2025). Generative AI and collaboration: opportunities for cultivating collective intelligence. Journal of Organization Design. 
Valentine, M. and Bernstein, M. (2025). Flash Teams: Leading the Future of AI-Enhanced, On-Demand Work. MIT Press.
Ratcliffe, E. (2025). All of My Employees Are AI Agents, and So Are My Executives. WIRED.
Vincent, N. (2022). The Paradox of Reuse, Language Models Edition. Data Leverage.
Atmakuri, S. et al. (2025). Making AI citations count with Asta. Ai2.
McMahon, C. et al. (2017). The Substantial Interdependence of Wikipedia and Google – A Case Study on the Relationship Between Peer Production Communities and Information Technologies. AAAI ICWSM.
Lanier, J. (2023). There is No AI. The New Yorker.
Li, H. et al. (2023). The Dimensions of Data Labor: A Road Map for Researchers, Activists, and Policymakers to Empower Data Producers. FAccT.
39

=== 第 40 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
Devil’s advocate or voice equalizer? Effective AI teammates may vary across 
collaboration scenarios 
•
AI can play varied roles in teams, mirroring functional roles from classic Group 
Theory (Benne & Sheats, 1948), to improve collaboration depending on the 
scenario. 
•
Siemon (2022) identifies four prototypical roles that people would like for AI 
agents to perform for teams: Coordinator, Creator, Perfectionist, Doer. 
•
Chiang et al. (2024) show that introducing a Large Language Model (LLM) as a 
devil’s advocate in a group’s decision process significantly improves the team’s 
appropriate reliance on an AI decision aid. This role might also help amplify 
minority voices (Lee et al., 2025).
•
Overall, different collaboration settings benefit from different AI behaviors, and no 
single AI persona fits all teams. 
•
For instance, in creative collaborations like brainstorming, an AI “co-ideator” can 
enhance idea diversity by generating novel suggestions and helping participants 
refine and evaluate concepts (Shaer et al., 2024). 
•
In contrast, for conflict resolution and consensus-building scenarios, an AI 
mediator that synthesizes diverse viewpoints into balanced group statements 
can foster agreement and reduce polarization (Tessler et al., 2024). 
Elaborating Team Roles for Artificial Intelligence-based Teammates in 
Human-AI Collaboration (Siemon, 2022).
Benne, K. D. and Sheats, P. (1948). Functional Roles of Group Members. Journal of Social Issues.
Siemon, D. (2022). Elaborating team roles for artificial intelligence-based teammates in human-AI collaboration. Group Decision and Negotiation.
Chiang, C.W. et al. (2024). Enhancing AI-Assisted Group Decision Making through LLM-Powered Devil's Advocate. IUI.
Lee, S. H. et al. (2025). Amplifying Minority Voices: AI-Mediated Devil's Advocate System for Inclusive Group Decision-Making. IUI.
Shaer, O. et al. (2024). AI-Augmented Brainwriting: Investigating the use of LLMs in group ideation. CHI
Tessler, M. H. et al. (2024). AI can help humans find common ground in democratic deliberation. Science.
40

=== 第 41 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
AI facilitation can boost information-sharing and inclusion, though shaping 
decision outcomes remains challenging
 
•
Through facilitation agents appearing in online meeting platforms, people are 
increasingly exposed to AI meeting participants that track time, summarize 
meetings, and more (e.g., Microsoft’s Facilitator Agent, and Zoom’s AI 
Companion).
•
Alsobay et al. (2025) compared AI and human facilitation in a group task 
in which participants have different information that must be shared to reach a 
decision. AI facilitators boosted a measure of information sharing by 22% over 
no facilitation and were perceived favorably by participants. However, neither 
human nor AI facilitators changed group decisions, suggesting that outcome-
shaping may require tools that additionally target decision-making processes 
(e.g. Chiang et al., 2024).
•
AI agents can also support more inclusive meetings by observing interactions, 
asking for users’ perspectives, and intervening when appropriate. However, as 
with decision-making, outcome-shaping is hard, because while people prefer 
agents to ask before intervening, they may also rationalize away their input 
(Houtti et al., 2025).
Participants in meetings with an AI facilitator shared more information 
compared to those in other conditions. Time on the horizontal axis 
corresponds to scheduled LLM facilitator interventions (Alsobay et al., 2025).
The “Observe, Ask, Intervene” framework from Houtti et al. (2025).
Microsoft Study: Alsobay, M. et al. (2025). Bringing Everyone to the Table: An Experimental Study of LLM-Facilitated Group Decision Making. arXiv Working Paper.
Chiang, C. et al. (2024). Enhancing AI-Assisted Group Decision Making through LLM-Powered Devil's Advocate. IUI.
Houtti, M. et al. (2025). Observe, Ask, Intervene: Designing AI Agents for More Inclusive Meetings. CHI.
41

=== 第 42 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
AI can drive goal clarity for effective meetings and smarter workflows
•
As the clear expression of goals becomes increasingly vital in an AI world (Passi, 
2025), meetings stand out as a key opportunity where improved goal articulation 
and communication can drive effective human collaboration (Scott et al., 2024). 
•
In a large-scale field study, Tankelevitch et al. (2025) find that workplace 
reflection on meeting goals can drive effective meeting behaviors across 
workflows, with many opportunities for AI assistance throughout the meeting 
life-cycle. 
•
Through brief reflective dialogue, AI improves meeting preparation by helping 
people clarify and express goals, transform them into actionable outputs, and 
take proactive collaborative actions to drive meeting effectiveness (Scott et al., 
2025; Doherty et al., in prep.). 
•
AI interfaces can support tracking goals during meetings (Chen et al., 2025a; 
Chen et al., 2025b), as well as ensure the flow of goals between meetings and 
across workflows by supporting workers in prospective and retrospective 
thinking about goals (Vanukuru et al., 2025).  
•
When goals are externalized in this way, they become structured inputs for other 
forms of AI-driven collaboration, such as document creation or spec-driven 
development (GitHub, 2025).
Three example design concepts from Vanukuru et al. (2025) demonstrating how AI 
interfaces can support ‘temporal work’ across collaborative workflows: (a) Instant 
Recaps use AI to dynamically adapt their support for goal reflection based on the 
time people have after meetings, (b) Adaptive Meeting Handoff uses AI to support 
effective goal-driven transitions between disparate meetings, and (c) Project 
Browser allows people to explore and make sense of projects at different 
timescales. 
Microsoft Study: Passi, S. (2025). Agentic AI has a Human Oversight Problem. SSRN Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Scott, A. et al. (2024). Mental Models of Meeting Goals: Supporting Intentionality in Meeting Technologies. CHI.
Microsoft Study: Tankelevitch, L. et al. (2025). Nudging Attention to Workplace Meeting Goals: A Large-Scale, Preregistered Field Experiment. Under Review.
Microsoft Study: Scott, A. et al. (2025). What Does Success Look Like? Catalyzing Meeting Intentionality with AI-Assisted Prospective Reflection. CHIWORK.
Microsoft Study: Doherty, E. et al. (in prep.). AI-Assisted Support for Intentionality in Workplace Meetings.
Microsoft Study: Chen, X. et al. (2025a). Are We On Track? AI-Assisted Active and Passive Goal Reflection During Meetings. CHI 2025.
Chen, W. et al. (2025b). EchoMind: Supporting Real-time Complex Problem Discussions through Human-AI Collaborative Facilitation. CSCW.
Microsoft Study: Vanukuru, R. et al. (2025). Strengthening the Chain of Intentionality Across Meetings: AI-Assisted Retrospection and Prospection For Knowledge Work. DIS.
Microsoft Study: Github. (2025). Spec-driven development with AI: Get started with a new open source toolkit . The GitHub Blog.
42

=== 第 43 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
Proactivity transforms AI from a passive tool into more of a “team member”
•
When a collaborative AI is developed to be more proactive, it starts to take on roles more akin to being a “team member” – 
raising new ideas, identifying risks, and suggesting next steps.
•
Huang et al. (2025) demonstrate that proactive information gathering fundamentally changes the role of LLMs from passive 
responders to collaborative thought partners, improving user satisfaction by 42%. Their qualitative evaluations showed that 
users interpret proactive questioning as engagement and competence—traits associated with teammates rather than tools.
•
Liu et al. (2025a) introduce Thoughtful AI as a paradigm shift from reactive, turn-based systems to agents that continuously 
think out loud and share their evolving reasoning during interactions, fostering proactive behavior and cognitively aligned 
collaboration. They argue this approach transforms AI from a passive tool into a thought partner, capable of initiating 
dialogue, suggesting next steps, and adapting as the conversation evolves.
•
Commonly-used NLP techniques like next speaker prediction fall short in multi-party dynamics, where conversations are fluid 
and overlapping. Predicting the next speaker does not help the AI determine the optimal timing for its own intervention 
without disrupting the flow. It also fails to capture the underlying motivation or reasoning behind speaking turns, so the AI 
cannot assess whether its contribution would add value at that moment (Liu et al., 2025b).
•
New techniques allow an AI to decide when to speak up and contribute during group interactions. For example, Lu et al. 
(2024) explore anticipatory planning and timing, showing that AI can learn when to intervene by predicting tasks and 
leveraging human feedback. By fine-tuning on timing decisions, the model learned conversational dynamics (e.g. pauses, 
topic shifts) and task progression cues to identify opportune moments for contribution.
•
Drawing from cognitive psychology and real human turn-taking data, Liu et al. (2025b) show that modeling human-like turn-
taking and timing through internal reasoning improves perceived intelligence and appropriateness of AI contributions.
Microsoft Study: Huang, T. et al. (2025). Teaching Language Models To Gather Information Proactively. EMNLP.
Liu, X. et al. (2025a). Interacting with Thoughtful AI. arXiv Working Paper.
Liu, X. et al. (2025b). Proactive Conversational Agents with Inner Thoughts. CHI.
Lu, Y. et al. (2024). Proactive Agent: Shifting LLM Agents from Reactive Responses to Active Assistance. ICLR.
43

=== 第 44 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
Team AI alignment should reward deliberation and long-horizon goals
•
Standard RLHF-inspired alignment techniques that are essential to the success of AI 
models (e.g., PPO, DPO) fail to maintain reliability in extended multi-turn (Laban et 
al., 2025) and multi-party dialogues (Nath et al., 2025a; 2025b) because they assume 
static, single-user interactions and optimize for narrow, turn-level rewards (Wu et al., 
2025). 
•
Wu et al. (2025) highlight the limitations of traditional alignment methods that 
optimize for single-turn correctness and immediate user satisfaction, and propose a 
multi-turn reward function that evaluates responses based on their long-term impact 
on collaboration, boosting task success by 18.5% and user satisfaction by 17.6%.
•
Nath et al. (2025a) show that standard alignment techniques lose their reliability in 
long multi-turn, multi-party conversations, as these methods assume a static 
mapping from the agent’s action to the outcome and fail to account for the 
complexity of group conversations where each participant can alter the course of 
those actions.
•
Nath et al. (2025b) propose a “Frictional Agent Alignment Framework” that explicitly models conversation state and frictive 
conditions (Clark, 1996), accounts for group dynamics where collaborator responses can alter effects of intervention,  and 
optimizes for collaborative processes like common-ground construction and deliberation.
COLLABLLM incorporates multiturn-aware rewards from collaborative 
simulation, enabling forward-looking strategies (Wu et al., 2025).
Microsoft Study: Laban, P. et al (2025). LLMs Get Lost In Multi-Turn Conversation. arXiv Working Paper.
Nath, A. et al. (2025a). Let’s Roleplay: Examining LLM Alignment in Collaborative Dialogues. CEUR-WS.
Nath, A. et al. (2025b). Frictional Agent Alignment Framework: Slow Down and Don’t Break Things. ACL.
Microsoft Study: Wu, S. et al. (2025). COLLABLLM: From Passive Responders to Active Collaborators. ICML.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge University Press.
44

=== 第 45 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
New evaluation metrics are needed for proactive agents in group settings
•
Modern collaborative AI systems that actively assist or mediate human teams demand reimagined evaluation approaches. 
Conventional metrics for single-user, reactive AI assistants (e.g., response accuracy or user satisfaction) are insufficient – instead, 
evaluation must consider multi-user dynamics, social acceptance, and long-term impacts.
•
Unlike reactive assistants, proactive AI systems must be evaluated on their ability to choose when and how to help, manage complex 
group dynamics, and adapt to context, beyond simply giving correct answers (Liu et al., 2025a; 2025b). This means tracking metrics like 
consensus-building, timing and frequency of interventions, fairness in turn-taking, and the agent’s ability to adapt its support to the 
conversation’s context. 
•
Beyond proactivity, multi-party collaborations present distinct challenges absent in individual settings: uneven participation, 
information asymmetry, coalition formation, social influence, groupthink, and minority voice suppression—that require new metrics for 
success. Recent work shows the value of capturing information-sharing quality (Alsobay et al., 2025), consensus change (Liu et al., 
2025b), and participation equity (Houtti et al., 2025) in multi-person tasks.
•
Collectively, the recent research calls for evaluation metrics to assess both process and outcomes, recognizing improved AI 
interventions may not immediately translate to better outcomes (Alsobay et al., 2025; Houtti et al., 2025); to account for temporal 
misalignment between immediate and delayed effects of AI interventions (Liu et al., 2025b; Nath et al., 2025); and including social 
perception and user acceptance as independent dimensions from technical quality (Tessler et al., 2024).
•
Static benchmarks cannot capture interactive, emergent, and adaptive behaviors. Multiple surveys highlight that traditional static 
benchmarks fail for proactive agents in dynamic multi-party settings. The shift toward "dynamic evaluation" and "continuously updated 
benchmarks" reflects recognition that proactive behavior, emergent coordination, and adaptive responses to evolving group dynamics 
cannot be assessed through fixed test sets (Zhu et al., 2025; Yehudai et al., 2025).
Liu, X. et al. (2025a). Proactive Conversational Agents with Inner Thoughts. CHI.
Microsoft Study: Liu et al. (2025b). ProMediate: A Socio-cognitive framework for evaluating proactive agents in multi-party negotiation. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Alsobay, M. et al. (2025). Bringing Everyone to the Table: An Experimental Study of LLM-Facilitated Group Decision Making. arXiv Working Paper.
Houtti, M. et al. (2025). Observe, Ask, Intervene: Designing AI Agents for More Inclusive Meetings. CHI.
Nath, A. et al. (2025). Let’s Roleplay: Examining LLM Alignment in Collaborative Dialogues. CEUR-WS.
Tessler, M. et al. (2024). AI can help humans find common ground in democratic deliberation. Science.
Zhu, K. et al. (2025). MultiAgentBench : Evaluating the Collaboration and Competition of LLM agents. ACL.
Yehudai, A. et al. (2025). Survey on Evaluation of LLM-based Agents. arXiv Working Paper.
45

=== 第 46 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
Simulation frameworks can be testbeds for evaluating AI in group settings
•
Modern LLMs have enabled a step-function improvement in agent-based simulation of the 
behavior of groups of people (Park et al., 2023). Unlike earlier rule-based bots, LLM-powered 
agents interpret nuanced context, maintain memory for cohesive multi-turn conversations, 
and exhibit closer to human-like reasoning and communication skills.
•
There are now multiple LLM-driven multi-agent simulation platforms – e.g. SOTOPIA (Zhou 
et al., 2024), InnerThought (Liu et al., 2025a), TinyTroupe (Salem et al., 2025), ProMediate (Liu 
et al., 2025b) – that allow scientists and developers to create realistic virtual teams of 
people-simulating AI agents working and conversing together. Platforms such as 
ProMediate simulate multi-stakeholder negotiations with proactive mediators, enabling 
quantitative metrics like consensus gains, intervention timing, and socio-cognitive 
intelligence, while SOTOPIA puts AI agents in games or role-play scenarios to further assess 
teamwork, strategic planning, and communication.
•
These systems provide controlled environments in which AI agents built to support teams 
can interact and learn in complex scenarios (negotiations, planning), offering a powerful lens 
to observe and test collaborative behaviors before real-world deployment. For instance, Liu 
et al. (2025a) show how these simulations probe nuanced social dynamics—e.g., when to 
interject—by modeling internal decision mechanisms that weigh relevance and information 
gaps, enabling evaluation of proactive participation strategies.
•
Study findings do reveal gaps—e.g., opponent modeling and team coordination—even with top-tier models, underscoring 
the need for richer simulations and targeted training to advance collaborative competence (Chen et al., 2024).
Multi-party conversation simulation with a proactive 
mediator agent in ProMediate (Liu et al., 2025b).
Park, J. S. et al. (2023). Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior. UIST.
Zhou, X. et al. (2024). Sotopia: Interactive evaluation for social intelligence in language agents. ICLR. 
Liu, X. et al. (2025a). Proactive Conversational Agents with Inner Thoughts. CHI.
Salem, P. et al. (2025). TinyTroupe: An LLM-powered Multiagent Persona Simulation Toolkit. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Liu, Z. et al. (2025b). ProMediate: A Socio-cognitive framework for evaluating proactive agents in multi-party negotiation. arXiv Working Paper.
Chen, J. et al (2024). LLMArena: Assessing Capabilities of Large Language Models in Dynamic Multi-Agent Environments. ACL.
46

=== 第 47 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
The success of AI in team settings likely depend on reinforcement learning 
coupled with tunable simulation frameworks
•
Recent breakthroughs demonstrate a move beyond static supervised learning to using reinforcement learning (RL) and self-play 
as dominant methods for teaching AI teammates how to collaborate. By having LLM-powered agents simulate human 
colleagues, models can practice multi-turn interactions and autonomously discover effective teamwork strategies in controlled 
virtual environments.
•
For example, researchers are using multi-agent RL and self-reflection techniques to train AI agents to collaborate effectively, by 
learning to coordinate better (Bo et al., 2024) or to form alliance and build trust (FAIR et al., 2022).
•
Wang et al. (2024) proposed SOTOPIA-π, leveraging behavior cloning and self-play reinforcement learning to train a 7B LLM to 
match GPT-4-level collaboration in multi-agent tasks. Park et al. (2025) extended this paradigm with MAPoRL, co-training 
multiple LLMs through interactive self-play and RL rewards to enhance teamwork and generalization across complex domains.
•
Abdelnabi et al. (2024) demonstrate that multi-agent negotiation simulations can expose how varying agent roles—cooperative, 
competitive, or adversarial—shape interaction dynamics, underscoring the need for strategic control over simulation parameters 
to stress-test and refine AI negotiators. Complementing this, Rao et al. (in prep.) provide empirical evidence that adjusting 
contextual “knobs” such as team size, diversity, and goal type systematically influences collaboration patterns (e.g., larger teams 
slow consensus, diverse teams increase debate). Together, these works argue that effective training environments must be 
steerable, enabling researchers and organizations to purposefully shape emergent behaviors and align AI teammates with 
desired collaboration outcomes before deployment.
Bo, X. et al. (2024). Reflective Multi-Agent Collaboration based on Large Language Models. NeurIPS.
Meta Fundamental AI Research Diplomacy Team (FAIR) et al. (2022). Human-level play in the game of Diplomacy by combining language models with strategic reasoning. Science.
Wang, R. et al. (2024). SOTOPIA-π: Interactive Learning of Socially Intelligent Language Agents. ACL. 
Abdelnabi, S. et al. (2024). Cooperation, competition, and maliciousness: LLM-stakeholders interactive negotiation. NeurIPS.
Microsoft Study: Rao, A. et al. (in prep.). Measuring and Steering Emergent Collaboration Behaviors in LLM Agents.
47

=== 第 48 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
Validation, norms, and visibility are likely important in human-AI teams
•
Social validation drives trust calibration: Because AI logic is often opaque, 
humans struggle to verify it independently. Trust likely can be established 
when AI contributions are explicitly validated or cross-checked by other 
human team members (Cambon & Farach, 2025; Zercher et al., 2025).
•
Norms for voluntary engagement: Establishing norms around optionality is 
critical. In objective tasks, making AI advice voluntary can increase 
acceptance. However, in high-stakes or subjective contexts, mandatory 
protocols may be necessary to ensure the AI is utilized (Cambon & Farach, 
2025; Smith, 2025).
•
AI as an embodied or signal-based actor: Because AI lacks physical presence, 
it risks being ignored. To function as a team member, AI should generate 
signals (through movement in virtual spaces or active communication) that 
allow humans to infer intent and coordinate behaviors implicitly (Cambon & 
Farach, 2025; Schröder et al., 2025; Smith et al., 2025).
•
Team ratio shifts the agent’s role: In dyads (1 human + 1 AI), evidence 
suggests humans may lack shared team identity, defaulting to a tool-user 
relationship. In small teams (triads), the AI can act as a creative partner, while 
in larger groups, it can shift to a governance layer that corrects human bias 
(Cambon & Farach, 2025; Georganta & Ulfert, 2024; Zercher et al., 2025).
A conceptual illustration of "Fluid Collaboration" derived from the “Cooperative 
Cuisine” study, where partners prepare meals in a simulated kitchen. In this model, 
agents (represented as Red and Blue) dynamically switch roles to manage 
bottlenecks.  This visualizes the on-the-fly adaptations observed in unpredictable 
environments and illustrates a standard of implicit coordination that AI should 
emulate to function as an effective teammate (Schröder et al., 2025).
Microsoft Study: Cambon, A. and Farach, A. (2025). Human Agent Teaming: Practice Lessons from Field Experimentation. Internal.
Zercher, D. et al. (2025). How can teams benefit from AI team members? Exploring the effect of generative AI on decision-making processes and decision quality in team-AI collaboration. Journal of Organizational Behavior. 
Smith, A. et al. (2025). Navigating AI convergence in human–AI teams: a signaling theory approach. Journal of Organizational Behavior.
Schröder, F. et al. (2025). Towards fluid human-agent collaboration: From dynamic collaboration patterns to models of theory of mind reasoning. Frontiers in Robotics and AI. 
Georganta, E. and Ulfert, A. (2024). Would you trust an AI team member? Team trust in human-AI teams. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology. 
48

=== 第 49 页 ===
AI for Teamwork
aka.ms/nfw
Dittos: How mimetic AI agents can augment relationships
•
Dittos are embodied, mimetic, reciprocal agents that look, sound, and 
discuss like the person who created them (Leong et al., 2024).
•
The person represented by the Ditto (the Source), prepares the Context 
on topics that the Ditto can talk about on behalf of the Source, and gets 
apprised of any interactions with their Ditto through a Recap. The Source 
and Collaborators can build on any Ditto conversations in developing 
their ongoing relationship, extending their availability.
•
While Dittos were originally developed for workplace settings, they are 
being explored in other settings as well:
•
FamilyDittos: Connecting with remote family members, especially 
separated by inconvenient time zones. (Tanprasert et al., 2025).
•
IRL Dittos: Connecting with remote colleagues by encountering their 
Dittos in shared, public spaces (like a hallway) (Lee et al., 2025).
•
There are many questions about the responsible design of Dittos. 
Because a Ditto seems like someone people know, people believe Dittos 
more than GenAI. Researchers conducted Black Mirror Writers’ Room 
exercises with the project team to proactively identify responsible design 
implications  (Lee et al., 2023; Klassen & Fiesler, 2022).
Source → Ditto Context
Ditto Recap→ Apprises 
Source of interactions
Collaborators → Converse with Ditto
Source → Collaborators 
develop ongoing relationship
Complete communication cycle with Dittos, including the Source preparing the 
context for the Ditto, Collaborators interacting with the Ditto, and the Source 
getting a Recap of all interactions with the Ditto
Collaborator talking with a Ditto in the hallway
Microsoft Study: Leong, J. et al. (2024). Dittos: Personalized, Embodied Agents That Participate in Meetings When You Are Unavailable. CSCW.
Microsoft Study: Tanprasert, T. et al. (2025). FamilyDittos: Reimagining Intergenerational Interaction through Mimetic Agents, CSCW.
Microsoft Study: Lee, S. et al. (2025). IRL Dittos: Embodied Multimodal AI Agent Interactions in Open Spaces. arXiv Working Paper.
Lee, P. et al. (2023). Speculating on Risks of AI Clones to Selfhood and Relationships: Doppelganger-phobia, Identity Fragmentation, and Living Memories. CSCW.
Klassen, S. and Fiesler, C. (2022). "Run Wild a Little With Your Imagination": Ethical Speculation in Computing Education with Black Mirror. SIGCSE.
49

=== 第 50 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
AI shifts effort from ‘doing’ to ‘choosing’, which risks cognitive deskilling 
unless usage is accompanied by upskilling and reskilling
•
The generative AI shift moves the locus of work effort from ‘thinking by doing’ to ‘choosing 
from outputs’, potentially reducing the judgment needed to develop and maintain skills and 
expertise (Sarkar, 2024; Macnamara et al., 2024).
•
Cognitive skills at risk range from foundational metacognitive skills such as planning and 
confidence calibration (Tankelevitch et al., 2024), key transferable work skills (Morandini et al., 
2025), and specific professional skills (e.g. Accounting – Eisikovits et al., 2025; Law - Gomez 
Schieber et al. 2025; Medicine - Natali et al., 2025, and Programming - Le, 2025).
•
Concerns about deskilling, tied to changes in distributed cognition between people and 
technology, have consistently accompanied the introduction of new technologies and 
sparked debates about their advantages and disadvantages (Crowston & Bolici, 2025). 
Grinschgl & Neubauer (2022) note that skills are not always maximally offloaded, rather 
people make situational cost-benefit considerations. 
•
Akin to the desktop computer revolution of the 1980s, AI will require holistic reskilling and 
upskilling through education/training (Ersanlı et al., 2025) and features designed into models 
and interfaces (Crowston & Bolici, 2025).
Transversal Skills and Competences model (Adapted from 
Morancini et al., 2023).
Microsoft Study: Sarkar, A. (2025). AI Should Challenge, Not Obey. CACM.
Macnamara, B.N. et al. (2024). Does Using Artificial Intelligence Assistance Accelerate Skill Decay And Hinder Skill Development Without Performers’ Awareness? Cognitive Research: Principles and Implication.
Microsoft Study: Tankelevitch, L. et al. (2024). The Metacognitive Demands And Opportunities Of Generative AI. CHI.
Morandini, S. et al. (2023). The Impact Of Artificial Intelligence On Workers’ Skills: Upskilling And Reskilling In Organisations. Informing Science.
Eisikovits, N. et al. (2025). Should Accountants Be Afraid Of AI? Risks And Opportunities Of Incorporating Artificial Intelligence Into Accounting And Auditing. Accounting Horizons.
Gomez Schieber, E. A. et al. (2025). Attorneys And AI: How Lawyers Use Artificial Intelligence And Analyze Its Impacts. CSCW.
Natali, C. et al. (2025). Ai-induced Deskilling In Medicine: A Mixed-method Review And Research Agenda For Healthcare And Beyond. Artificial Intelligence Review.
Le, H. (2025). The Deskilling Of Software Development And The Impact Of AI Chatbots On Programmers' Skills And Roles. Generative AI in Software Engineering.
Crowston, K. and Bolici, F. (2025). Deskilling And Upskilling With AI Systems. Information research.
Grinschgl, S. and Neubauer, A. C. (2023). Supporting Cognition With Modern Technology: Distributed Cognition Today And In An Ai-enhanced Future. Frontiers.
Ersanlı, C. Y. et al. (2025). A Review Of Global Reskilling And Upskilling Initiatives In The Age Of AI. AI and Ethics.
 
50

=== 第 51 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
There are diverse paths for AI to support thinking, rather than substitute for it
•
Tankelevitch et al. (2025) synthesize design directions for augmenting thinking with 
AI: provoke reflection, scaffold sensemaking, and preserve user agency and 
cognitive engagement.
•
Castañeda et al. (2025) propose helping users ‘decide how to decide’ (see figure). 
Gmeiner et al. (2025) found that AI nudges to clarify goals, reflect on decisions, 
and evaluate outcomes helped designers plan and better align outputs with 
original intent.
•
Sarkar (2025) demonstrates a prototype workflow in which direct material 
manipulation of AI views and AI provocations aid strategic reading, planning, and 
decision-making by looking at critiques, alternatives, and lateral moves. 
•
Kang et al. (2025) and Yang et al. (2025) show that when AI helps with reasoning by 
analogy, people improve in finding concepts that feel unfamiliar yet feasible, 
overlooked, or unexpected. 
•
Wang and Chilton (2025) show how AI can support users in identifying design 
patterns from examples, whereas Dang et al. (2025) show how AI can support users 
in understanding and applying implicit norms in writing.
InDecision’s iterative loop. The initial elicitation (1) allows the user to provide 
open-text descriptions of their decision and relevant considerations for 
options and criteria. The user is presented with a list of eight options (2). The 
user can keep, add to, or remove these options. To promote reflection on what 
is most important to them, the user may continue only after narrowing down to 
three. Criteria refinement is composed of two stages: (3a) prioritization, where 
a user can add, remove, and sort criteria in tiers of priority; and (3b) 
redefinition, where the user selects between a range of possible meanings 
associated with each criterion. These steps are repeated in an iterative loop (4) 
(Castañeda et al., 2025). 
Microsoft Study: Tankelevitch, L. et al. (2025). Understanding, Protecting, And Augmenting Human Cognition With Generative AI: A Synthesis Of The CHI 2025 Tools For Thought Workshop. arXiv Working Paper.
Castañeda, C. et al. (2025). Supporting AI-Augmented Meta-Decision Making With InDecision. arXiv Working Paper.
Gmeiner, M. et al. (2025). Exploring The Potential Of Metacognitive Support Agents For Human-AI Co-Creation. DIS.
Microsoft Study: Sarkar, A. (2025). Artificial Intelligence As A Tool For Thought. TEDAI Vienna.
Kang, H. B. et al. (2025). BioSpark: Beyond Analogical Inspiration To LLM-augmented Transfer. CHI.
Yang, Y. et al. (2025). From Overload To Insight: Scaffolding Creative Ideation Through Structuring Inspiration. arXiv Working Paper.
Wang, S. and Chilton, L. B. (2025). Schemex: Discovering Design Patterns From Examples through Iterative Abstraction And Refinement. arXiv Working Paper.
Dang, H. et al. (2025). CorpusStudio: Surfacing Emergent Patterns In A Corpus Of Prior Work While Writing. CHI.
51

=== 第 52 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
How to make AI an effective tool in the classroom 
•
The ease and speed of AI tools might be valuable in the workplace, but learning 
requires “desirable difficulties” (Walker & Vorvoreanu, 2025). 
•
When AI is used for summaries and syntheses, learning may be shallower (Melumad 
et al., 2025; Stadler et al., 2024). However, thoughtful implementation can improve 
learning. Kestin et al. (2025) found that an AI tutor using pedagogical best practices 
and measures to reduce confabulation helped students learn more, faster, than an 
active-learning classroom experience, as reflected in test scores.
•
AI can help with self-paced, personalized learning, but it can also lead to over-
estimation of one’s skills. Students need help calibrating their mental models of 
learning gains with AI (Simkute et al., 2024; Urban et al., 2024).
•
Equity and the digital divide are still a concern. While AI can help students with 
disabilities, studies show that learning benefits from AI thus far favor students of 
higher socioeconomic status (DeSimone et al., 2025; Yu et al. 2024; Zhang et al., 
2024).
Four considerations for effective AI 
integration into the classroom
1.
Ensure student readiness. Students need enough 
domain knowledge to be able to evaluate AI 
outputs.
2.
Teach AI literacy. Help students understand the 
basics of AI, including that it makes mistakes.
3.
Use AI as a supplement. Teacher guidance and 
human connection are central to learning. AI 
cannot replace that, but it can supplement with 
personalized explanations and examples.
4.
Foster cognitive engagement with AI. Encourage 
AI usage that helps students evaluate their skills 
and think critically.
Effective AI integration into the classroom will require training 
programs to manage attitudes towards use as will as new specific 
skills (Adapted from Walker & Vorvoreanu, 2025).
Microsoft Study: Walker, K. and Vorvoreanu, M. (2025). Learning Outcomes With GenAI In The Classroom: A Review Of Empirical Evidence. Microsoft.
Melumad, S. et al. (2025). Experimental Evidence Of The Effects Of Large Language Models Versus Web Search On Depth Of Learning. PNAS NEXUS.
Stadler, M. et al. (2024). Cognitive Ease At A Cost: : Llms Reduce Mental Effort But Compromise Depth In Student Scientific Inquiry. Computers in Human Behavior.
Kestin, G. et al. (2025). AI Tutoring Outperforms In-class Active Learning: An RCT Introducing A Novel Research-based Design In An Authentic Educational Setting. Nature Scientific Reports.
Microsoft Study: Simkute, A. et al. (2024). The New Calculator? Practices, Norms, And Implications Of Generative AI In Higher Education. arXiv Working Paper.
Urban, M. et al. (2024). Chatgpt Improves Creative Problem-Solving Performance In University Students: An Experimental Study. Computers & Education.
DeSimone, M. et al. (2025). From chalkboards to chatbots: Evaluating The Impact Of Generative AI On Learning Outcomes In Nigeria. World Bank Group.
Yu, R. et al. (2024). Whose Chatgpt? Unveiling Real-World Educational Inequalities Introduced By Large Language Models. arXiv Working Paper.
Zhang, C. et al. (2024). College Students’ Literacy, Chatgpt Activities, Educational Outcomes, And Trust From A Digital Divide Perspective. New Media & Society.
52

=== 第 53 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
For ideation, AI has persistent risks and fragile benefits without careful use
•
Designing AI-driven creativity support tools requires carefully considering the creative process and its various stages, as well as 
how such tools can impact creative thinking in the long term (Tankelevitch et al., 2025). 
•
Qin et al.’s (2025) lab study found that using LLMs before independent ideation reduced the number of original ideas and 
lowered creative self-efficacy, compared to use after independent ideation.
•
Kumar et al.’s (2025) lab study found that those doing unassisted ideation with no exposure to LLMs had the best outcomes. 
Those using LLM assistance got a performance boost by cognitively offloading the work to the AI, not from collaboratively 
producing ideas. Individuals exposed to LLM strategies or guidance performed worse in later unassisted rounds. Overall, 
LLM-generated strategies reduced idea diversity, and effects continued even after AI use stopped. 
•
LLM support did not impact the number of ideas produced in Bangerl et al.’s (2025) lab study of group ideation, but it did 
significantly reduce group elaboration of those ideas. This is again possibly due to increased cognitive offloading to the AI. 
Similarly to Kumar et al.’s (2025) study, this effect carried over even when not using LLMs.
•
One key design task is problem reframing (exploring what a problem is about). In Shin et al.’s (2025) lab study, using LLMs did 
not improve the usefulness of problem frames, (regardless of whether LLMs directly provided frames, were used in a free-form 
manner, or used in a structured process). Expert designers produced somewhat more novel frames than novice designers, but 
these more novel frames were not also more useful. 
•
A systematic review (Heigl, 2025) finds that longitudinal and field studies of AI and creativity are still rare and will be needed to 
understand and plan for the complex issues arising from AI in creative work.
Microsoft Study: Tankelevitch, L. et al. (2025). Understanding, Protecting, And Augmenting Human Cognition With Generative AI: A Synthesis Of The CHI 2025 Tools For Thought Workshop. arXiv Working Paper.
Qin, P. et al. (2025). Timing Matters: How Using LLMs At Different Timings Influences Writers' Perceptions And Ideation Outcomes In Ai-assisted Ideation. CHI.
Kumar, H. et al. (2025). Human Creativity In The Age Of LLMs: Randomized Experiments On Divergent And Convergent Thinking. CHI.
Bangerl, M. M. et al. (2025). CreAItive Collaboration? Users' Misjudgment Of Ai-creativity Affects Their Collaborative Performance. CHI.
Shin, J. et al. (2025). No Evidence For LLMs Being Useful In Problem Reframing. CHI.
Heigl, R. (2025). Generative Artificial Intelligence In Creative Contexts: A Systematic Review And Future Research Agenda. Management Review Quarterly.
53

=== 第 54 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
AI decision-support should enhance both accuracy and human skills
•
Human expertise enables critical use of AI advice, but growing reliance risks eroding 
people’s independent abilities and the capacity to judge AI outputs (Macnamara et al., 
2024). There is real-world evidence of AI-induced deskilling: clinicians who relied on an AI 
system for polyp detection during colonoscopies showed a significant decline in their 
independent ability to identify precancerous lesions after just three months of AI use 
(Budzyn et al., 2025).
•
A nascent body of research in AI-assisted decision-making is proposing design 
interventions that enhance users’ independent skills along with their immediate decision 
accuracy. 
•
Gajos & Mamykina (2022) found that providing users with AI explanations without explicit 
AI decision recommendations improved learning outcomes along with decision accuracy. 
•
Bucinca et al. (2025) showed that even when AI recommendations are present, contrastive 
explanations (which explain human knowledge gaps by highlighting differences between 
the AI’s choice and a likely human choice about the same task) can enhance users' 
independent decision-making skills without sacrificing their accuracy.
•
Buijsman et al. (2025) argue that decision-support must also enable domain-specific 
autonomy, with one approach being the use of defeaters—information that signals when 
AI outputs should be doubted or reconsidered.
Contrastive AI explanations (top) address human knowledge gaps 
better than unilateral AI explanations (bottom) (Adapted from 
Bucinca et al., 2025).
Macnamara, B. N. et al. (2024). Does Using Artificial Intelligence Assistance Accelerate Skill Decay And Hinder Skill Development Without Performers’ Awareness? Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications.
Budzyń, K. et al. (2025). Endoscopist Deskilling Risk After Exposure To Artificial Intelligence In Colonoscopy: A Multicentre, Observational Study. The Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology.
Gajos, K. Z. and Mamykina, L. (2022). Do People Engage Cognitively With AI? Impact Of AI Assistance On Incidental Learning. IUI.
Microsoft Study: Bucinca et al. (2025). Contrastive Explanations That Anticipate Human Misconceptions Can Improve Human Decision-Making Skills. CHI.
Buijsman, S. et al. (2025). Autonomy By Design: Preserving Human Autonomy In AI Decision-Support | Philosophy & Technology. Philosophy & Technology.
54

=== 第 55 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
Workplace learning can combat AI overreliance and cognitive atrophy
•
Blind trust (Benzing et al., 2025), overreliance (Passi et al., 2024), and cognitive offloading 
(Gerlich, 2025) are risks of human-AI interactions. Benzing et al.’s (2025) survey of 1,800 
global full-time English-speaking employees found that 2 in 3 employees report trusting 
AI agents; however, 60% skip accuracy checks in AI output. 
•
Workplace learning plays a crucial role in combatting these risks, while also driving the 
employee engagement and resilience required for successful AI workforce transformation 
(Malik & Garg, 2017). Teams with strong AI readiness (including skills and literacy) report 
greater individual and collective value from AI, such as higher productivity, better decision-
making, and more creative, collaborative teams (Benzing et al., 2025; Xue & Song, 2025).
•
Human-AI interactions that are discursive and progressive promote cognitive enrichment 
and combat cognitive atrophy (Danry et al., 2023), which are the core elements of 
traditional Socratic learning methods used to develop metacognition and critical thinking.
•
Given its ability to provide personalized, adaptive, role- and task-based learning while 
incorporating context, memory, and conversational turns, AI presents a promising new 
learning modality (Joshi, 2025; Tomitsu, 2025). There is opportunity to develop novel 
interactive learning experiences, like assessment-based dialogic questioning (Hung et al., 
2024), to drive employee engagement through workplace upskilling. 
Workplace learning and experimentation create a cycle for 
Agentic AI adoption (Adapted from Benzing et al., 2025).
Microsoft Study: Benzing, M. et al. (2025). 2025 Agentic Teaming & Trust Report. Microsoft.
Microsoft Study: Passi, S. et al. (2024). Appropriate Reliance On Generative AI: Research Synthesis. Microsoft.
Gerlich, M. (2025). AI Tools In Society: Implications Of Cognitive Offloading And The Future Of Critical Thinking. Societies. 
Malik, P. and Garg, P. (2017). Learning Organization And Work Engagement: The Mediating Role Of Employee Resilience. The International Journal of Human Resource Management.
Xue, S. and Song, Y. (2025) Unlocking The Synergy: Increasing Productivity Through Human-ai Collaboration In The Industry 5.0 Era. Computers & Industrial Engineering.
Danry, V. et al. (2023). Don’t Just Tell Me, Ask Me: AI Systems that Intelligently Frame Explanations as Questions Improve Human Logical Discernment Accuracy Over Causal AI Explanations. CHI.
Joshi, S. (2025). Agentic Generative AI And The Future US Workforce: Advancing Innovation And National Competitiveness. International Journal of Research and Review.
Tomitsu, H. et al. (2025). The Cognitive Mirror: A Framework For AI-powered Metacognition And Self-regulated Learning. Frontiers in Education.
Hung, J. et al. (2024). Socratic Mind: Scalable Oral Assessment Powered By AI. Learning@ Scale.
55

=== 第 56 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
•
There has been a steady year-over-year increase in AI tool usage among students and 
educators in both K–12 and higher education. 
•
An estimated 80% of K-12 teachers and 95% of higher education educators have used AI 
for school-related purposes at least once, while 19% and 60% report using it regularly. With 
respect to students, an estimated 90% in K-12 and 95% in higher education have used AI 
for school-related purposes at least once, while 25% and 36% report using it regularly 
(Microsoft Education, 2025).
•
Most current usage relies on freely available general purpose AI tools (e.g., Claude, 
ChatGPT, Copilot, Gemini). Students are more likely to use these general purpose versions 
than education specific tools (Gillespie, 2025).
•
More generally, guidance and policy are lagging adoption: roughly half of surveyed school 
districts reported providing training to teachers on how to use AI, with another quarter 
planning to do so in the coming year (Doss et al., 2025).
•
Expectations point to increased AI use for school-related purposes, but there are continued 
concerns about academic dishonesty, overreliance, and misinformation among both 
teachers and students (Microsoft Education, 2025).
•
New programs are providing external funding to train teachers for AI use, including a 
National Academy for AI Instruction by the American Federation of Teachers, jointly funded 
by Microsoft, OpenAI, and Anthropic.
Microsoft Study: Microsoft Education / IDC, 2025. 2025 AI In Education Report Survey Details. Microsoft.
Gillespie, N. et al. (2025). Trust, Attitudes And Use Of Artificial Intelligence: A Global Study 2025. University of Melbourne/KPMG.
Doss, C. J. et al. (2025). AI Use In Schools Is Quickly Increasing But Guidance Lags Behind. RAND.
56
Students and teachers rely on generic AI tools but usage guidance lags behind
Teacher reports of US school or district policies 
or guidance about the use of AI related to academic integrity 
(Adapted from Doss et al., 2025).

=== 第 57 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
Preparing young learners for an AI future requires a further shift away from 
syntax specifics and towards problem solving and logical abstraction
•
Coding education remains essential but should continue to evolve from memorizing syntax to developing computational 
thinking, problem-solving, and human–AI collaboration skills (OECD, 2025). Students need to learn to frame problems, design 
solutions, and critically evaluate generated code rather than simply write code manually.
•
Generative AI alters the purpose of learning to code, making it necessary for students to understand how to manage, adapt, 
and govern AI-produced outputs responsibly (UNESCO, 2023). Educators should teach how to review, debug, and improve AI-
generated solutions, positioning students as accountable decision-makers rather than passive recipients of outputs.
•
Developing AI fluency from an early age is central to maintaining agency and preventing future digital exclusion. Younger 
learners should learn to craft effective prompts, interrogate model reasoning, identify and correct AI errors, and maintain 
human oversight. This supports equity by ensuring all young people—not only those with advanced technical access—gain 
the knowledge needed to understand, interact with, and shape AI systems. Coding remains an important tool for meaningful 
participation in the digital world (UNICEF, 2021; OECD, 2023).
•
Consequently, coding and technology curricula should continue to emphasize foundational skills—problem decomposition, 
logical reasoning, debugging, and verification—but with a stronger shift toward higher-level abstraction and AI-aware 
practice. Instruction should prioritize structuring problems, interrogating AI outputs, and applying prompt engineering as 
extensions of computational thinking (OECD, 2025; UNESCO, 2023). This mirrors earlier transitions from machine-level to 
high-level programming. Pedagogy should use discursive, iterative, cognitively enriching methods (Zhao et al., 2025) to 
promote critical engagement and prevent overreliance on AI (Fan et al., 2025; OECD, 2025).
OECD (2025). What Should Teachers Teach And Students Learn In A Future Of Powerful AI?. OECD.
UNESCO (2023). Guidance for Generative AI in Education and Research. UNESCO. 
UNICEF (2021). Policy Guidance On AI For Children: Version 2.0 | Recommendations For Building AI Policies And Systems That Uphold Child Rights. UNICEF.
OECD (2023). Empowering Young Children In The Digital Age. OECD.
Zhao, G. et al. (2025). A Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Based Human-Computer Collaborative Programming Learning Method. Journal of Educational Computing Research.
Fan, G. et al. (2025). The Impact Of AI-assisted Pair Programming On Student Motivation, Programming Anxiety, Collaborative Learning, And Programming Performance. International Journal of STEM Education.
57

=== 第 58 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
Digital empathy is emerging as a key differentiator in the design of AI 
conversational agents
•
The role of digital empathy, understood as the ability of AI models to interpret users’ experiences 
and perspectives, is becoming increasingly studied and formalized (Suh et al., 2025), and it is 
materializing in multiple forms, from emotional-regulation support (Das Swain et al., 2025) to 
adaptive embodied conversational agents.
•
As traditional benchmarks become saturated, companies are viewing AI personality, 
communication style, and appearance as key differentiators and integral parts of their model 
optimization pipelines. Notable examples include the communication styles of recent OpenAI 
GPT models, as well as text to speech and agents by Sesame AI, Hume AI, and ElevenLabs.
•
Therapy and companionship are emerging as a rapidly growing application area in which digital 
empathy can play an important role (Sanders, 2025). While AI chatbots offer the potential to 
broaden access to care, there remains significant room for improvement in how they recognize 
and respond to mental health issues. Recent research is highlighting the potential risks and 
harms associated with using chatbots for emotional support (Chandra et al., 2025).
•
There is growing debate about human empathy versus AI empathy and their respective roles in 
future job automation in domains such as customer service and healthcare (Howcroft et al., 
2025; Rubin et al., 2025). Emerging research also highlights the potential benefits of combining 
both forms of empathy, for example by reducing cognitive load while addressing uncivil 
customer interactions (Das Swain et al., 2025). 
Uncivil interactions—rude, aggressive, 
emotionally charged—raised cognitive load 
(orange). Empathetic AI support eased the strain 
(green), nearly matching civil exchanges (blue) 
(Das Swain et al., 2025).
Microsoft Study: Suh, J. et al. (2025). SENSE-7: Taxonomy And Dataset for Measuring User Perceptions Of Empathy In Sustained Human AI Conversations. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Das Swain, V. et al. (2025). AI On My Shoulder: Supporting Emotional Labor In Front-Office Roles With An LLM-Based Empathetic Coworker. CHI.
Sanders, M. Z. (2025). How People Are Really Using Gen AI In 2025. Harvard Business Review.
Microsoft Study: Chandra, M. et al. (2025). Longitudinal Study On Social and Emotional Use Of AI Conversational Agent. arXiv Working Paper.
Howcroft, A. et al. (2025). AI Chatbots Versus Human Healthcare Professionals: A Systematic Review And Meta Analysis Of Empathy In Patient Care. British Medical Bulletin.
Rubin, M., et al. (2025). Comparing The Value Of Perceived Human Versus AI-Generated Empathy. Nature Human Behaviour.
58

=== 第 59 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
Growing evidence suggests psychological well-being should be a core AI 
design and governance criterion
•
Psychological well-being is the state of feeling mentally healthy, resilient, and fulfilled 
through positive emotions, life satisfaction, and purpose (Yiğit & Çakmak, 2024).
•
Whether explicitly designed to be companions or not, users are appropriating conversational 
AI tools for social and emotional purposes (Laestadius et al., 2022; Siddals et al., 2024). These 
systems can fill emotional, social, and informational gaps, providing 24/7 availability and 
perceived non-judgmental communication that some associate with temporary 
improvement in well-being (Zhang et al., 2025).
•
However, reliance on AI for companionship and unconditional validation may have 
psychological risks, such as dependence, distorted self-perception, and reinforcement of 
maladaptive behaviors or beliefs, and may reshape social norms around relational 
technology (Huang et al., 2024; Marriott & Pitardi, 2024).
•
These impacts likely emerge from complex, long-term interactions between often 
unobservable factors (e.g., user’s disposition, environments) and AI design, making
it difficult to isolate any one technology feature as the cause for psychological 
harm or benefit (Fang et al., 2024; Chandra et al., 2024). 
•
This research raises questions about how AI designers might establish ethical norms that preserve human well-being, invest in 
community-driven evaluation, conduct longitudinal monitoring, and include guardrails and supportive prosocial user experiences.
Psychological impact of AI on human is highly context- and 
interaction-dependent. Conceptualizing psychological risks must 
take the full dynamic user context into account (Chandra et al., 
2025).
Yiğit, B. and Çakmak, B.Y. (2024). Discovering Psychological Well-Being: A Bibliometric Review. Journal of Happiness Studies.
Laestadius, L. et al. (2024). Too Human And Not Human Enough: A Grounded Theory Analysis Of Mental Health Harms From Emotional Dependence On The Social Chatbot Replika. New Media & Society.
Siddals, S., et al. (2024). It Happened To Be The Perfect Thing”: Experiences Of Generative AI Chatbots For Mental Health. npj Mental Health Research.
Zhang, R. et al. (2025). The Dark Side Of AI Companionship: A Taxonomy Of Harmful Algorithmic Behaviors In Human-AI Relationships. CHI.
Huang, S. et al. (2024). AI Technology Panic—Is AI Dependence Bad For Mental Health? A Cross-lagged Panel Model And The Mediating Roles Of Motivations For AI Use Among Adolescents. Psychology Research and Behavior Management.
Marriott, H.R. and Pitardi, V. (2024). One Is The Loneliest Number… Two Can Be As Bad As One. The Influence Of AI Friendship Apps On Users' Well‐being And Addiction. Psychology & marketing.
Fang, C.M. et al. (2025). How AI And Human Behaviors Shape Psychosocial Effects Of Chatbot Use: A Longitudinal Randomized Controlled Study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.17473.
Microsoft Study: Chandra, M. et al. (2025). From Lived Experience To Insight: Unpacking The Psychological Risks Of Using Ai Conversational Agents. FAccT.
59

=== 第 60 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
Greater conceptual clarity is needed to reliably measure anthropomorphic AI 
systems' behaviors and their impacts
•
The lack of conceptual clarity about the different ways in 
which AI system behaviors can be anthropomorphic hinders 
our ability to measure such behaviors, understand their 
impacts, and decide when they may or may not be desirable 
(Abercrombie et al., 2023; Cheng et al., 2025a; DeVrio et al., 
2025). 
•
How to effectively intervene on anthropomorphic AI system 
behaviors to make them appear less human-like or mitigate 
possible attendant harms remains understudied and unclear 
(Cheng et al., 2025a; Cheng et al., 2025b).
•
Taxonomies of anthropomorphic behaviors can help 
clarify what can make AI system behaviors anthropomorphic 
(Emnett et al., 2024; DeVrio et al., 2025). For instance, 
anthropomorphic AI system behaviors can be identified by 
applying five high-level guiding lenses that ask whether these 
behaviors are suggestive of internal states, social positioning, 
materiality, autonomy, and communication skills (DeVrio et al., 
2025).
Abercrombie, G. et al. (2023). Mirages: On anthropomorphism in dialogue systems. EMNLP.
Microsoft Study:  Cheng,M. et al. (2025a). Dehumanizing Machines: Mitigating Anthropomorphic Behaviors in Text Generation Systems. ACL.
Microsoft Study:  Cheng, M. et al. (2025b). “I Am The One And Only, Your Cyber BFF”: Understanding The Impact Of GenAI Requires Understanding The Impact Of Anthropomorphic AI. ICLR.
Emnett, C. Z. et al. (2024). Using Robot Social Agency Theory To Understand Robots’ Linguistic Anthropomorphism. HRI.
Microsoft Study: DeVrio, A. et al. (2025). A Taxonomy Of Linguistic Expressions That Contribute To Anthropomorphism Of Language Technologies. CHI.
Examples of anthropomorphic AI system behaviors (and their sources), including explicit claims of 
human-likeness, claims of physical experiences, statements suggestive of affect, and statements 
suggestive of cognitive or reasoning abilities (Cheng et al., 2025b).
Overview of guiding lenses to identify anthropomorphic system behaviors and example of types of 
expressions that are associated with those guiding lenses (DeVrio et al., 2025).
60

=== 第 61 页 ===
Thinking, Learning, and Psychological Influences
aka.ms/nfw
New mappings of the design space of anthropomorphic AI systems can help 
their designers understand implications and identify alternatives
•
AI systems might be perceived as human-like not only because of their behaviors, but also due to how they are designed, 
deployed and used (Olteanu et al., 2025; Cheng et al., 2025).
•
There is a wide range of AI systems designed to reproduce or mimic people's likeness, work, abilities, behavior, or humanness 
(Olteanu et al., 2025). Some developers seek to mimic specific individuals (McIlroy-Young et al. 2022a; Lee et al. 2023), while 
others aim to imbue systems with more general human-like characteristics (Maeda and Quan-Haase, 2024).
•
Olteanu et al. (2025) charted the current landscape of existing and prospective anthropomorphic AI systems and provided 
analytical scaffolding for discussions about whether, when, and how to design and deploy such systems. Their review also 
illustrates that there is a wide range of design choices available to those seeking to develop anthropomorphic AI systems.
•
A greater recognition of the range of 
possible design choices can help 
developers be more intentional and 
explicit about the choices they make 
when designing and deploying 
anthropomorphic AI systems. It can 
also support them in reflecting on the 
implications of those choices, including 
alternatives possibly available to them 
(Olteanu et al., 2025).
Design considerations for AI systems intended to reproduce people's likeness, work, abilities, behavior or humanness. It includes considerations 
related to what is being reproduced or simulated, for what purposes, who controls what the systems reproduce and how they can be used, and 
possible impacts. Figure from Olteanu et al. (2025).
Microsoft Study:  Olteanu, A. et al. (2025). AI automatons: AI systems intended to imitate humans. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study:  Cheng, M. et al. (2025). “I Am the One and Only, Your Cyber BFF”: Understanding the Impact of GenAI Requires Understanding the Impact of Anthropomorphic AI. ICLR.
McIlroy-Young, R. et al. (2022). Mimetic models: Ethical implications of ai that acts like you. AIES.
Lee, P. Y. K. et al. (2023). Speculating on risks of AI clones to selfhood and relationships: Doppelganger-phobia, identity fragmentation, and living memories. CSCW.
Maeda and Quan-Haase. (2024). When human-AI interactions become parasocial: Agency and anthropomorphism in affective design. FAccT.
61

=== 第 62 页 ===
Specific Roles and Industries
aka.ms/nfw
Attempts to measure productivity writing software with AI are reigniting old 
myths about software engineering
•
The rapid release and distribution of AI coding tools is leading to high-profile discussions 
about “lines of code” written by AI, but lines of code as a productivity measure has been widely 
debunked as being invalid and game-able (Barb et al., 2014).
•
Current GenAI software tools often focus on code generation, but the writing of code is not 
usually the bottleneck in software development, and multiple studies over the years have 
found software engineers only spend between 15% and 25% of their time developing code 
(Kumar et al., 2025; Meyer et al., 2017; Meyer et al., 2019).
•
Other myths exist, like AI helping all tasks and engineers equally, or turning individual 
developers into 10x developers (Butler et al., 2026).
•
Lastly, many believe if AI tools are high performing, they will be adopted automatically. This 
overlooks the sociotechnical factors included in adoption, including the “competence penalty” 
women face when using AI (Gai et al., 2025; Butler et al., 2025). A recent study found when 
code reviewers believed the engineer had used AI and was a woman, they rated the engineer's 
competency 13% lower on average (compared to 6% lower if they believed it was a male using 
AI) (Gai et al., 2025).
8 Myths of Software Engineering and AI (Butler
et al., 2026).
Barb, A. et al. (2014). A statistical study of the relevant of lines of code measures in software projects. Innovations in Systems and Software Engineering.
Kumar, S. et al. (2025). Time Warp: The gap between developers' ideal vs actual workweeks in an AI-driven era. ICSE SEIP.
Meyer, A. et al. (2017). The worklife of developers: activities, switches and perceived productivity. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering.
Meyer, A. et al. (2019). Today was a good day: the daily life of software developers. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering.
Butler, J. et al. (2026). 8 Myths on Software Engineering and AI. In preparation.
Gai, P. et al. (2025). Competence penalty is a barrier to the adoption of new technology. SSRN Working Paper.
62

=== 第 63 页 ===
Specific Roles and Industries
aka.ms/nfw
GenAI is blurring the line between Product Manager and Software Engineer 
•
GenAI is fundamentally reshaping how software gets built, with Product Managers (PMs) reporting being able to do 
more traditional Software Engineering (SWE) tasks, and SWEs reporting doing more PM tasks (Ulloa et al., 2025).
•
In a Microsoft study of 885 PMs, 12% reported using GenAI for prototyping and coding, saying they could now do tasks 
they used to rely on data science or SWE colleagues to complete (Ulloa et al., 2025).
•
PMs report that they perceive their role is changing, with GenAI being a necessary new skill that broadens their identity 
and requires upskilling (Ulloa et al., 2025).
•
Some researchers are predicting that GenAI will cause a shift in required tasks and competencies of software engineers, 
with them needing to be able to describe tasks and requirements in prompts, consider the customer perspective more, 
and move to more of a supervisor role – competencies typically attributed to product managers (Gröpler et al., 2025).
•
This was recently shown when developers using AI agents had more success when working iteratively with software 
engineering agents (as opposed to one-shot) and researchers suggested that developers should still be involved in 
multiple stages of the software engineering process (Kumar et al., 2025).
•
Adopting GitHub Copilot led to firms’ new hires of software engineering having 13.3% more non-coding skills such as 
Microsoft Office, project management and communication on LinkedIn but no change in the number of programming 
skills, suggesting engineers looking for work in the GenAI world put more emphasis on developing non-coding skills 
(Baird, 2024).
Microsoft Study: Ulloa, M. et al. (2025), Product Manager Practices for Delegating Work to Generative AI: “Accountability must not be delegated to non-human actors”. ICSE SEIP.
Gröpler, R. et. al. (2025), The Future of Generative AI in Software Engineering: A Vision from Industry and Academia in the European GENIUS Project. arXiv Working Paper. 
Microsoft Study: Kumar, A. et al., (2025). Why AI agents still need you: Findings from developer-agent collaborations in the wild. ASE.
Baird, M. (2024). Early evidence on the impact of Generative AI on Software Engineer’s Employment Outcomes. LinkedIn Economic Graph.
63

=== 第 64 页 ===
Specific Roles and Industries
aka.ms/nfw
Vibe coding is a meaningful evolution of AI-assisted programming
•
Vibe coding is an emerging programming paradigm where developers 
primarily write code by interacting with code-generating large language 
models rather than writing code directly. 
•
The vibe coding workflow is defined by iterative goal satisfaction and 
output verification (Sarkar and Drosos, 2025). In a study of CS and SWE 
students doing vibe coding, most interactions are dedicated to testing or 
debugging (Geng et al., 2025).
Microsoft Study: Sarkar, A. and Drosos, I. (2025). Vibe coding: programming through conversation with artificial intelligence. PPIG. 
Geng, F. et al. (2025). Exploring Student-AI Interactions in Vibe Coding. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Pimenova, V.et al. (2025). Good Vibrations? A Qualitative Study of Co-Creation, Communication, Flow, and Trust in Vibe Coding. Under Review. 
64
•
Vibe coding involves material disengagement from directly manipulating code; programmers instead rely on rapid, targeted 
inspection or "impressionistic scanning" (Sarkar & Drosos, 2025). For students vibe coding, engaging with code accounts for a 
low proportion of actions, and the majority (90.37%) of that activity is limited to interpretation (Geng et al., 2025).
•
Programming expertise is essential but redirected toward context management (e.g., curating files and threads) and 
evaluation (Sarkar & Drosos, 2025). High-context prompts with technical signals (errors, failing cases) improve debugging, 
while low-context prompts offer little actionable information. Experience significantly influences interaction quality: advanced 
students are far more apt to communicate intent grounded in code structure, logic, and context, resulting in significantly fewer 
low context prompts (M=8.39% for advanced vs. M=28.89% for introductory students) (Geng et al., 2025). Prompts in vibe 
coding blend broad directives with detailed technical specifications (Sarkar & Drosos, 2025). When general prompts fail to 
yield desired results, programmers strategically shift to specific, low-level instructions, often by including error messages or 
specific code snippets (Sarkar & Drosos, 2025).
•
Trust is a key mediating factor that enables co-creation and facilitates flow (Pimenova et al., 2025); it is granular and dynamic 
and developed through continuous iterative verification (Sarkar & Drosos, 2025). Some developers mitigate risk by reserving 
vibe coding for low-stakes contexts (Pimenova et al., 2025) such as "throwaway weekend projects" (Sarkar & Drosos, 2025).
Proposed theory of vibe coding experience from Pimenova et al. (2025).

=== 第 65 页 ===
Specific Roles and Industries
aka.ms/nfw
Generative AI reduces demand for writing and design jobs on online labor 
platforms while raising complexity of remaining work
•
After ChatGPT’s release, automation-prone clusters on a freelance platform saw larger declines relative to manual-intensive 
clusters: writing jobs declined by ~30%, software/app/web ~21%, and engineering ~10%. Image-generating AI led to ~17% 
fewer posts in graphic design and 3D modeling (Demirci et al., 2025). Other studies report rising demand for web 
development (Qiao et al., 2024) or other complementary clusters including development of 'AI-powered chatbots' or 
'Machine Learning' (Teutloff et al., 2025). del Rio-Chanona et al. (2025) provide an overview of several impacts found for 
online labor markets.
•
The remaining automation-prone openings are more complex and slightly higher paying, but competition per posting 
intensified as more applicants apply per opening (Demirci et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025). Freelancers who adopt AI tools or 
shift towards complementary skills and AI-related work are able to maintain or expand their opportunities (Qiao et al., 2024). 
•
Similar to broader labor market findings (Brynjolfsson et al., 2025; Hosseini & Lichtinger, 2025), data from online labor 
markets also suggests slowing demand for junior and entry-level roles in exposed occupations, alongside rising value of 
advanced skills, human judgment and adaptability (Teutloff et al., 2025).
•
Generative AI lowered the cost of producing written content, undermining the signaling value of tailored written applications 
on online labor platforms. Before LLM adoption, employers paid a premium for highly customized proposals, which largely 
disappeared afterwards. Structural estimates indicate that top-quintile workers are hired less often, while bottom-quintile 
hires increase, reducing overall matching efficiency (Galdin & Silbert, 2025).
Demirci, O. et al. (2025). Who Is AI Replacing? The Impact of Generative AI on Online Freelancing Platforms. Management Science.
Qiao, D. et al. (2024). AI and Freelancers: Has the Inflection Point Arrived? ICIS.
Teutloff, O. et al. (2025). Winners and losers of generative AI: Early Evidence of Shifts in Freelancer Demand. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization.
del Rio-Chanona, R. M. et al. (2025). AI and jobs. A review of theory, estimates, and evidence. arXiv Working Paper.
Liu, J. et al. (2025). "Generate" the Future of Work through AI: Empirical Evidence from Online Labor Markets. Under Review.
Brynjolfsson, E. et al. (2025). Canaries in the Coal Mine? Six Facts about the Recent Employment Effects of Artificial Intelligence. Working Paper.
Hosseini, S. M. and Lichtinger, G. (2025). Generative AI as Seniority-Biased Technological Change: Evidence from U.S. Résumé and Job Posting Data. SSRN Working Paper.
Galdin & Silbert (2025. Making Talk Cheap: Generative AI and Labor Market Signaling. 
65

=== 第 66 页 ===
Specific Roles and Industries
aka.ms/nfw
AI assistance in healthcare can boost performance but raises questions on 
best integration practices
•
Studies of clinician–AI collaboration show use of AI can improve diagnostic and 
management performance over use of conventional resources, particularly in complex cases. 
However, results vary and, in some studies, AI alone performs similarly, raising questions 
about when collaboration adds value and how responsibilities should be defined (Everettet 
al., 2025; Goh et al., 2025; Brodeuret al., 2025; McDuffet al., 2025).
•
In radiology, vision–language models assist with report drafting, error detection, and 
workflow efficiency. Advances like smaller models and factuality metrics aim to improve 
accessibility and trust (Tanno et al., 2024; Zambrano Chaves et al., 2025).
•
Agent-based tools are emerging for team-based care, such as tumor boards, where AI can 
help structure multi-expert input and provide claim-level transparency (Blondeel,2025).
•
Recent work emphasizes that best practices for integrating AI into clinical workflows remain 
unsettled, with calls for rigorous evaluation to determine optimal collaboration (Johri et al., 
2025). Other studies highlight the need for bias audits, confidence signals, and auditable 
outputs to maintain accountability (Yang et al.,2025; Noriet al., 2023; Unellet al., 2025; 
Thiemeet al., 2025).
Distribution of Diagnostic Performance Scores when 
comparing different workflows of clinician-AI collaboration 
(Everett et al., 2025)
Microsoft Study: Everett, S. S. et al. (2025). From Tool to Teammate: RCT of clinician–AI collaborative workflows. medRxiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Goh, E. et al. (2025). GPT-4 assistance for improvement of physician performance on patient care tasks: a randomized controlled trial. Nature medicine.
Microsoft Study: Brodeur, P. G. et al. (2025).  Superhuman performance of a large language model on the reasoning tasks of a physician. arXiv Working Paper. 
McDuff, D. et al. (2025). Towards Accurate Differential Diagnosis with Large Language Models. Nature.
Tanno, R. et al. (2024). Collaboration between clinicians and vision-language models in radiology report generation. Nature medicine.
Microsoft Study: Zambrano Chaves, J. M. et al. (2025). A clinically accessible small multimodal radiology model and evaluation metric from chest X-ray findings. Nature communications.
Microsoft Study: Blondeel, M. et al. (2025). Demo: Healthcare Agent Orchestrator (HAO) for Patient Summarization in Molecular Tumor Boards. arXiv Working Paper.
Johri, S. et al. (2025). An evaluation framework for clinical use of large language models in patient interaction tasks. Nature medicine.
Yang et al. (2025). Demographic bias of expert-level vision-language foundation models in medical imaging. Science Advances.
Microsoft Study: Nori, H. et al. (2023). Capabilities of GPT-4 on Medical Challenge Problems. arXiv Working Paper.
Microsoft Study: Unell et al. (2025). CancerGUIDE: Cancer Guideline Understanding via Internal Disagreement Estimation. ML4H Proceedings.
Microsoft Study: Thieme, A. et al. (2025). Challenges for Responsible AI Design and Workflow Integration in Healthcare: A Case Study of Automatic Feeding Tube Qualification in Radiology. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact.
66

=== 第 67 页 ===
Specific Roles and Industries
aka.ms/nfw
AI is accelerating scientific discovery by generating new ideas and connecting 
across disciplines
•
Current evidence suggests AI mainly assists researchers 
rather than independently discovering new knowledge. It 
helps identify promising ideas, retrace known results, and 
surface cross-field connections (Agrawal et al., 2025; Baek 
et al., 2025; Jin et al., 2025; Bell et al., 2025). In some cases, 
frontier models have produced verified proofs when 
guided by experts (Bubeck et al., 2025).
•
AI agents enable experiments and behavioral modeling at scale and speed that wasn’t feasible before. However, they 
require validation across contexts and robust checks because risks such as limited diversity, sycophancy or prompt sensitivity 
can lead to overfitting and weak external validity (Manning & Horton, 2025; Anthis et al., 2025). These agent capabilities are 
also applied in UX research, where structured workflows and specialized agents compress multi-method 
sessions, validate concepts, and surface cross-question themes (Yogev Maday, 2025).
•
Foundation models simplify working with diverse types of data, allowing researchers to tackle more complex questions (Bell 
et al., 2025; Jin et al., 2025). AI can also broaden access to advanced tools (Korinek, 2025) and automate routine tasks, with 
stronger gains for early-career and non-English-speaking researchers (Filimonovic et al., 2025).
Main challenges that need to be addressed when LLM social simulations are applied (Anthis et al., 2025).
Agrawal, A. et al. (2025). AI in Science. NBER Working Paper.
Baek, J. et al. (2025). ResearchAgent: Iterative Research Idea Generation over Scientific Literature with Large Language Models. ACL. 
Jin, L. et al. (2025). AI for Science. Nature.
Bell, A. et al. (2025. Earth AI: Unlocking Geospatial Insights with Foundation Models and Cross-Modal Reasoning. arXiv Working Paper.
Bubeck, S. et al. (2025). Early science acceleration experiments with GPT-5. Working Paper.
Manning, B. and Horton, J. (2025). General Social Agents. arXiv Working Paper.
Anthis, J. R. et al. (2025). Position: LLM Social Simulations Are a Promising Research Method. ICML.
Microsoft Study: Yogev Maday, S. (2025). Fast-tracking UX insights: leveraging AI and research methods to gather feedback in 90 minutes. Internal.
Korinek, A. (2025). AI Agents for Economic Research. NBER Working Paper.
Filimonovic, D. et al. (2025). Can GenAI Improve Academic Performance? arXiv Working Paper.
67

=== 第 68 页 ===
Specific Roles and Industries
aka.ms/nfw
AI is also introducing new risks into the scientific process by making 
replicability and accountability more difficult
•
As AI becomes a powerful tool in research, it also raises tough questions about scientific integrity. Non-transparent generative 
processes make it harder to verify results, hold researchers accountable, and ensure that findings can be replicated (Blau et 
al., 2024). Outputs often depend on small prompt details which requires logging prompts and model versions for accurate 
replication. But even then, AI can reproduce prior ideas or proofs without attribution or occasionally hallucinates, so rigorous 
source checking is needed (Bubeck et al., 2025).
•
Scientific publishing faces new challenges as AI-generated papers flood preprint servers and conferences, potentially leading 
to a replicability crisis and overwhelming peer review processes (Ball, 2023; Naddaf, 2025). Similar to the broader "workslop" 
tendencies, this erodes trust, slows productivity, and can undermine collaboration (Niederhoffer et al., 2025). 
•
The peer review process is vulnerable because AI-generated reviews can slip through undetected, opening the door to 
manipulation and threatening the fairness and originality that science depends on. Rao etal. (2025) show that, while generic 
detectors struggle to distinguish LLM-generated reviews from human-written ones, a watermarking plus statistical testing 
pipeline using covert prompts embedded in PDFs could reliably identify LLM-generated reviews in practice.
•
Hosseini et al. (2023) call for structured, transparent disclosure of AI usage in the scientific research process, e.g. detailing who 
used the tool, which model, and how. And while transparency about AI use is meant to build trust, it can have the opposite 
effect as research shows. Disclosure often makes people more skeptical of both the research and the researchers behind it 
(Schilke & Reimann, 2025).
Microsoft Study: Blau, W. et al. (2024). Protecting scientific integrity in an age of generative AI. PNAS.
Bubeck, S. et al. (2025). Early science acceleration experiments with GPT-5. Working paper.
Ball, P. (2025). Is AI leading to a reproducibility crisis in science?. Nature news.
Naddaf, M. (2025). Major AI conference flooded with peer reviews written fully by AI. Nature news.
Niederhoffer, K. et al. (2025). AI-Generated "Workslop" Is Destroying Productivity. Harvard Business Review.
Rao, V. S. et al. (2025). Detecting LLM-generated peer reviews. PLOS One.
Hosseini, M. et al. (2025). The ethics of disclosing the use of artificial intelligence tools in writing scholarly manuscripts. Research Ethics.
Schilke, O. and Reimann, M. (2025). The transparency dilemma: How AI disclosure erodes trust. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes.
68

=== 第 69 页 ===
External Voices:
aka.ms/nfw
Iavor Bojinov (Harvard Business School)
Generative AI enables cross-occupational performance – but hits a "wall" at 
greater knowledge distances
•
Generative AI can transform a wide range of organizational tasks and the expertise 
required to perform them (Jia et al., 2024; Eloundou et al., 2024). Beyond changing 
how tasks are structured and executed, GenAI is reshaping the underlying skills 
needed for effective performance (Yue et al., 2022; Autor, 2024).
•
Prior research shows GenAI can narrow or widen performance gaps within 
occupations (Otis et al., 2025; Brynjolfsson et al., 2024; Dell'Acqua et al., 2023), but its 
role in bridging expertise gaps across occupations remains less understood. 
•
Grounded in transfer of learning theory (Singley & Anderson, 1989), a recent study 
examines when GenAI enables outsiders to perform tasks at insider-level and how this 
effect declines with greater knowledge distance, by asking three occupational groups 
to perform a task natural to one of them (Vendraminelli et al., 2025).
•
Results show adjacent outsiders can close gaps for some tasks but also reveal a "GenAI wall" - a threshold beyond which AI 
cannot bridge gaps as knowledge distance grows. Without domain knowledge, humans add too little value to AI's output.
•
AI can shorten learning curves and enable adapted tasks, supporting flatter organizations and dynamic, problem-focused 
teams. Yet, deep specialization remains critical: data scientists can't do marketers' work, and marketers can't do data scientists' 
work.
Output quality for article writing by condition and expertise. GenAI 
access boosts quality and enables marketing specialists to match 
web analysts, while technology specialists remain behind 
(Vendraminelli et al., 2025).
69
Jia, N. et al. (2024). When and how artificial intelligence augments employee creativity. Academy of Management Journal.
Eloundou, T. et al. (2024). GPTs are GPTs: Labor market impact potential of LLMs. Science. 
Yue, D. et al. (2022). Nailing Prediction: Experimental Evidence on the Value of Tools in Predictive Model Development. HBS Working Paper.
Autor, D. (2024). Applying AI to Rebuild Middle Class Jobs. NBER Working Paper. 
Otis, N. et al. (2025). The Uneven Impact of Generative AI on Entrepreneurial Performance: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya. HBS Working Paper. 
Brynjolfsson, E. et al. (2025). Generative AI at Work. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 
Dell'Acqua, F. et al. (2023). Navigating the Jagged Technological Frontier: Field Experimental Evidence of the Effects of AI on Knowledge Worker Productivity and Quality. HBS Working Paper. 
Singley, M. K. and Anderson, J. R. (1989). The transfer of cognitive skill. Harvard University Press. 
Vendraminelli, L. et al. (2025). The GenAI Wall Effect: Examining the Limits to Horizontal Expertise Transfer Between Occupational Insiders and Outsiders. HBS Working Paper.

=== 第 70 页 ===
External Voices:
aka.ms/nfw
Erik Brynjolfsson (Stanford University)
AI’s impact on work is emerging slowly but will hinge on creating new value, 
not easy substitution
•
AI’s impact on work is unfolding slowly, much like other general-purpose 
technologies. Productivity gains rarely appear immediately; they tend to follow a 
J-curve, with benefits emerging only after adoption, investment, and 
organizational redesign (Brynjolfsson, 1993; Brynjolfsson et al., 2021). Similarly, 
current labor market effects remain modest overall (Chandar, 2025; Gimbel et al., 
2025; Eckhardt & Goldschlag, 2025). 
•
Yet, early signals point to pressure on entry-level roles in AI-exposed fields, 
especially where automation is more likely than augmentation. Payroll and other 
types of data show declines for junior positions, while senior roles remain stable 
or grow (Brynjolfsson et al., 2025; Hosseini & Lichtinger, 2025; Klein Teeselink, 
2025; Humlum & Vestergaard, 2025). 
•
This raises a deeper question about direction: prioritizing human-like AI risks the 
Turing Trap, a situation where substitution dominates, concentrating economic 
and political power and limiting broad growth. Augmentation, by contrast, 
expands human capabilities and creates new tasks, but requires deliberate choices 
and supportive systems as capabilities and adoption grow (Brynjolfsson, 2022). 
Employment changes by age and exposure (Brynjolfsson et al., 2025).
Brynjolfsson, E. (1993). The Productivity Paradox of Information Technology. Communications of the ACM.
Brynjolfsson, E. et al. (2021). The Productivity J-Curve:  How Intangibles Complement General Purpose Technologies. AEJ Macroeconomics.
Chandar, B. (2025). Tracking Employment Changes in AI-Exposed Jobs. Working Paper.
Gimbel, M. et al. (2025). Evaluating the Impact of AI on the Labor Market: Current State of Affairs. The Budget Lab.
Eckhardt, S. and Goldschlag, N. (2025). AI and Jobs: The Final Word (Until the Next One). Economic Innovation Group.
Brynjolfsson, E. et al. (2025). Canaries in the Coal Mine? Six Facts about the Recent Employment Effects of Artificial Intelligence. Working Paper.
Hosseini, S. M. and Lichtinger, G. (2025). Generative AI as Seniority-Biased Technological Change: Evidence from U.S. Resume and Job Posting Data. SSRN Working Paper.
Klein Teeselink, B. (2025). Generative AI and Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from the United Kingdom. SSRN Working Paper.
Humlum, A. and Vestergaard, E. (2025). Large Language Models, Small Labor Market Effects. NBER Working Paper.
Brynjolfsson, E. (2022). The Turing Trap: The Promise & Peril of Human-Like Artificial Intelligence. Daedalus. 
70

=== 第 71 页 ===
External Voices:
aka.ms/nfw
Mark Daley (Western University)
A theoretical model shows AI-accelerated research risks creating substitution 
dynamics that could fundamentally reshape university labor
•
A recent model (Daley, 2025) demonstrated how increasingly capable, low-cost AI research systems could potentially negatively 
interact with metric-driven universities and grant funding processes.
•
Using an assumption of effective research capability doubling every ~16 months (with 16 being arbitrary and any value 
greater than zero has the same asymptotic conclusion), this model shows demand for human research labor collapses 
exponentially—a dynamic consistent with automation models showing declining labor share when machines displace human 
tasks (Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2018). This risks less human input to the core directions of research endeavors.
•
Research in labor economics shows that when automation substitutes for human labor, laborers' share of output shrinks and 
inequality widens (Autor & Salomons, 2018). For universities, this implies a sharp contraction in postdocs, RAs, and 
computational research staff as labs replace “routine” research work with cheap, scalable AI cognition.
•
High-skill, non-routine jobs are no longer insulated: recent evidence finds AI now substitutes for cognitive tasks traditionally 
performed by highly trained knowledge workers (e.g., literature reviews, data analysis, manuscript drafting). 
•
Without intervention, universities may become AI-driven knowledge factories, where human involvement persists only in tasks 
with high regulatory, physical, or relational constraints. Automation research consistently finds that unless institutions 
deliberately shift work toward complementary human tasks, substitution dominates (Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2018).
•
Policy levers such as investing in technology that is institutionally hard to automate and makes humans + AI jointly productive, 
changing academic evaluation from raw counts (of citations, publications) to quality-adjusted measures (such as societal impact, 
data/code release, etc.) and changing grant mechanisms to be partially lottery based can reduce substitutability and raise 
human-oversight floors to materially change the trajectory.
Daley, M. (2025). AI-accelerated research and university labor: a simple model of metric-driven substation. Working paper.
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2018). Artificial Intelligence, Automation and Work. NBER Working Paper.
Autor, D. and Salomons, A. (2018). Is automation labor-displacing? Productivity growth, employment and the labor share.  NBER Working Paper.
71

=== 第 72 页 ===
External Voices:
aka.ms/nfw
Constance Noonan Hadley (Boston University & Institute for Life at Work) 
Sarah L. Wright (University of Canterbury Business School)
Employees are increasingly using AI for more than just task help, they are 
using it for social support, and yet most are still lonely.
• Prior research on AI chatbots in personal contexts shows mixed effects. Some studies find AI companions can 
reduce loneliness (De Freitas et al., Forthcoming); others suggest AI may contribute to social withdrawal as 
people become dependent on AI rather than people (Fang et al., 2025; Pentina et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023).
• We extend this work by examining how AI is shaping interpersonal relationships in the workplace. We 
surveyed 1,555 U.S.-based knowledge workers who use AI on average daily. Participants reported how they 
perceive and interact with AI at work and how this relates to their sense of social support and loneliness. 
• People are anthropomorphizing AI at work: 78.1% reported using polite language (e.g., “thank you”) and 
28.4% picked a humanistic analogy for AI (e.g., “teammate,” “personal assistant”) rather than a technical one.
• Employees are also using AI for humanlike forms of social support. Using an adapted relationship functions 
inventory (Colbert et al., 2016), we measured AI use for career help, personal growth, companionship, and 
emotional support. Most participants are using AI for these functions (see chart) and finding that useful.    
Yet 52.2% still reported moderate to high work loneliness. Job satisfaction and intention to stay are far more 
tied to the level of social connection to colleagues in our study than any variables related to AI. 
• Overall, our findings indicate that AI has the potential to both enhance and erode the social experience of work. In open-ended 
comments and stories, some participants relayed fears that AI would create more siloed work, erode opportunities for mutual 
help and bonding with others, and leave them with a sense of existential loneliness from the artificiality of AI relationships. We 
encourage researchers, leaders, and developers to continue to study how AI affects social well-being and cohesion at work.
64.6%
54.5% 50.5%
35.4%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Usage of AI for social support at work 
(Hadley and Wright, Forthcoming).
De Freitas, J. et al. (Forthcoming). AI companions reduce loneliness. Journal of Consumer Research.
Fang, C. et al. (2025). How AI and human behaviors shape psychosocial effects of chatbot use: A longitudinal randomized controlled study , arXiv Working Paper.
Pentina, I. et al. (2023). Consumer–machine relationships in the age of artificial intelligence: Systematic literature review and research directions. Psychology & Marketing
Tang, P. et al. (2023). No person is an island: Unpacking the work and after-work consequences of interacting with artificial intelligence. Journal of Applied Psychology
Colbert, A. et al. (2016). Flourishing via workplace relationships: moving beyond instrumental support. Academy of Management.
Hadley, C., and Wright, S. (Forthcoming). Using AI to build human connection at work. In editorial process for Harvard Business Review.
72

=== 第 73 页 ===
External Voices:
aka.ms/nfw
Thomas Malone (MIT)
Collective intelligence may be the key
•
Almost all ways of organizing work
from hierarchical corporations 
to decentralized markets 
to teams of one person and one computer
are collectively intelligent systems (“superminds”).
•
Definition: Supermind -- Group of individuals acting together in ways that (at 
least sometimes) seem intelligent (Malone, 2018).
•
To design future superminds that combine humans and AI, researchers and 
developers should draw upon knowledge of how collective intelligence arises 
in many kinds of systems, including networks in computer science, markets in 
economics, ant colonies in biology, and many more (Malone & Bernstein, 
2015). 
•
Recent research already shows, for example, that:
•
Adding scaffolding, like guided steps and tailored interfaces, can improve 
human-AI creativity more than just chatbots (Heyman et al., 2024).
•
Human-AI combinations aren't always desirable. They often perform better 
for creative tasks than for decision tasks. And if humans alone outperform 
AI, adding AI often helps, but if AI is already better, adding humans can 
hurt (Vaccaro et al., 2024).
Comparison of effect sizes for human–AI synergy (left) and human 
augmentation (right). Each plot shows Hedge’s g effect sizes with 95% 
confidence intervals across 106 studies. Red areas indicate underperformance 
of the human-AI group, green areas indicate the human-AI group outperforming 
human alone (or AI alone) (Vaccaro et al., 2024).
Malone, T. (2018). Superminds. The Surprising Power of People and Computers Thinking Together. Little Brown.
Malone, T. and Bernstein, M. (2015). Handbook of Collective Intelligence. MIT Press.
Heyman, J. et al. (2024). Supermind Ideator: How Scaffolding Human-AI Collaboration Can Increase Creativity. ACM Collective Intelligence Conference.
Vaccaro, M. et al. (2024). When combinations of humans and AI are useful. Nature Human Behaviour.
73

=== 第 74 页 ===
External Voices:
aka.ms/nfw
Hatim Rahman (Northwestern University)
AI may amplify workplace inequality, unless organizations actively 
intervene to disrupt “inequality cascades.”
•
Organizations must actively intervene to build guardrails and structures around AI 
design, implementation and use in ways that mitigate, rather than amplify, inequality 
cascades of workplace AI systems (Kaurnakaran et al., 2025). 
•
The impact of AI on workplace inequality is multifaceted, spanning:
•
Wage inequality: how different workers’ skills and expertise are valued (versus 
devalued) in the labor market following the implementation of AI.
•
Encoded inequality: how the ideologies of certain groups (e.g., AI developers, 
managers) are inscribed into the design of AI (Neely et al., 2023).
•
Evaluative inequality: how different workers’ biases and perceptions shape their 
motivation, judgment, and trust in AI. 
•
Relational inequality: how relations of power, status and authority may be 
destabilized in human-AI configurations.
•
These different forms of inequalities cascade over the AI lifecycle: narratives and 
decisions made upstream, such as who is (not) involved in designing AI and what data 
are (not) collected, cascade downstream and can become entrenched as AI systems are 
implemented and used day-to-day in organizations (Drage et al., 2024).
Connections between AI impacts on inequality (Karunakaran et 
al., 2025)
Karunakaran, A. et al. (2025). Artificial Intelligence at Work: An Integrative Perspective on the Impact of AI on Workplace Inequality. Academy of Management.
Neely, M. T. et al. (2023). Social inequality in high tech: How gender, race, and ethnicity structure the world’s most powerful industry. Annual Review of Sociology.
Drage, E. et al. (2024). Engineers on responsibility: Feminist approaches to who’s responsible for ethical AI. Ethics and Information Technology.
74